[part0013.xhtml] Section 3: Body Dynamics
================================================================================
Total Control

## Chapter 7: Vision

Vision is, without a doubt, the most fundamental skill for proper riding. The majority of decisions made while riding are based on information coming in through your eyes. In basic terms, your eyes should be up to snuff, displaying 20/20 vision or better. It is absolutely worth getting your vision checked regularly as the technology exists to quickly and easily correct vision. But how you use your eyes is just as important as having properly functioning ones. Using your eyes skillfully requires some understanding of how you react to what you see.

Virtually all riders from newbies to MotoGP racers struggle with maintaining proper vision in a corner. The reason for this is our eyes evolved over millions of years to deal with potential hazards based on our maximum running speed. Currently the fastest human alive is Usain Bolt who has been clocked at just over 27 mph in the 100-meter dash. Because we can far exceed that speed on our motorcycles, we need to retrain our eyes to look much farther in front of ourselves than what seems natural. This is the only way to identify potential hazards early enough to deal with them effectively.

The main reason for vision being so critical is that you go where you look. You’ve probably heard this before, but no one ever told you why it is that you go where you look. The reason has to do with our biological makeup. Although we don’t normally think of ourselves this way, biologically speaking, human beings are predators. As carnivores, specifically, we have binocular vision where our eyes are set close together in the front of our heads. This is optimal for tracking moving prey. In the wild, humans are the top of the food chain, so this kind of vision helps us. Unfortunately, on the road motorcyclists are at the bottom of the traffic food chain. That means we have to stop seeing like predators, and learn how to start seeing like prey. If you want to know what I mean by “see like prey,” think about what your vision was like the last time you were walking by yourself late at night in a really bad neighborhood. More than likely, your eyes were trying to look everywhere all at once!

Correct

Looking all the way through the corner allows a much better line choice. To make vision easier it helps to turn your shoulders into the turn, as well.

Incorrect

Spotlight vs. Floodlight

What you are able to see is based not only on the amount of light available, but also on the types of things upon which you choose to notice. Much like a MAG light with its adjustable beam, we can illuminate a wide area with little detail (floodlight vision) or a small area with high detail (spotlight vision), based on how narrow an area we focus our attention on. Most human beings have no problem spotlighting on things. How else could we stare at computer screens all day and not go insane. Unfortunately most of us have lost much of our ability to use our floodlight vision effectively because we no longer have natural predators in the urban jungle.

So humans, like all predators, primarily use spotlight vision. On the motorcycle we call this target fixation. A perfect example of target fixation is a cheetah. In the wild, a cheetah operates like a targeting computer. Once it has locked its vision on a target such as, say, a gazelle in a herd, it will not stop until it reaches its intended target. In fact, even if a slower or injured gazelle crosses the cheetah’s path, it will literally jump right over it and continue on until it reaches its original target. This is how hard-wired into our DNA this predator vision is. It’s why when we see a pothole or a patch of gravel 30 feet in front of us, we often run right into the very thing we’re trying to avoid, even though we know intellectually we should change our line. In other words, target fixation is normal for humans as it has survival value in the wild. Unfortunately it has the opposite effect in traffic.

Looking at the ground in front of you increases your sense of speed. Using floodlight vision and looking farther ahead decreases your sense of speed and helps keep your mind and body relaxed.

In the American education system, much emphasis is placed on discovering life’s details. We use microscopes and telescopes to examine things both near and far. We use computers to analyze the world by breaking it up into micro-sized bits. We have, in essence, been trained to rely on the spotlight and forget about the floodlight.

By contrast, prey uses primarily floodlight vision, what a biologist would call “environmental awareness.” They try to always have a sense of where potential predators are (or could be lurking) in their area of influence. We need to be able to use both types of vision. For instance, we use spotlight vision to pick out specific reference points. These include things like corner entry and exit points, and braking points.

Growing up, the only floodlight-type training I received was in driver’s education class. Some of you might remember the Smith Driving System developed in the 1950s. In that system, one of the tenets of good driving was to “get the big picture.” Actually, Smith was right on the money. Using your vision as a floodlight slows down your “sense of speed” and allows you to be aware of more potential hazards and opportunities.

Sense of Speed

It’s important to make a distinction between your actual speed and your perceived sense of speed. Your mind can play tricks on you when you rely on your spotlight vision while operating a moving vehicle. For instance, if you look at the ground directly beneath you while riding at even moderate speeds, it can seem like you’re moving crazy-fast. If you then change your focus and look at the mountains in the background, it feels like you’re barely moving at all, even though your actual speed hasn’t changed.

Keith Code once told me of an experiment he performed to examine the perception of speed. He took a piece of paper and cut two “eye holes” in it and then tried to drive his car by looking through the small openings. He said that even driving straight down an empty road was terrifying when forced to see through the little holes because the sense of speed was tremendously increased.

When you’re riding over your head, you develop a similar sense that things are moving too fast. This occurs when you narrow your perspective to the spotlight view. The solution is to widen your perspective to the floodlight view because the bigger the viewing area, the slower things seem to move. Widening your viewing area certainly takes practice, but the farther ahead you look in a turn, the better off you will be. If you start looking farther ahead, you can slow things down in your mind. This gives your brain more time to make the decisions that let you avoid potential problems.

Looking Through Turns

It’s also important to note that our eyes have a sweet spot right in the middle of their travel. So it’s better to turn your head more to pick out your reference points with your pupils in the middle of your eyes, than to try to pick them out through the corners of your eyes. In fighter pilot training they call this technique having a “head on a swivel.” Due to the fact that our forward-facing eyes’ limited viewing angle makes us genetically predisposed toward spotlight vision, we are going to have to work harder to improve our floodlight vision.

In summation there are three important reasons for looking as far through a turn as possible. The first reason is the farther ahead you look, the earlier you will recognize any potential hazards and the sooner you’ll be able to spot opportunities for early acceleration. The second reason is to slow down your sense of speed, which will go a long way toward reducing any anxiety you may have about a turn. This will allow your body to stay relaxed and permit your mind to see the big picture. The third reason to look far through turns is that your body naturally wants to go in the direction it is looking.

Of course, before you look through the turn, you first must decide where your turning point will be. This requires a quick burst of spotlight vision on the turn point, followed by a switch to the floodlight view through the corner.

Practice riding in a circle and looking through the turn to the exit on the opposite side. Have a friend stand in the middle and see if your eyes are dancing around or staying focused on the constantly moving exit.

The best practice for looking through turns is to set up a circle in a clean parking lot and have a buddy stand in the center of it. You should be able to look through him for an entire revolution. He will be able to tell if you panic and look forward because he will be watching your eyes. This is much more difficult than it sounds but can be learned fairly quickly. I recommend doing this at a very slow speed until you are comfortable with the drill. There is no need to go fast as the important thing here is to train your head to be turned enough to see the center of the circle.

Take your time practicing this drill until you can do it effortlessly. The ability is a prerequisite for every cornering skill in this book, so make sure you have it down before trying anything else. The good news is that once you have mastered looking through the turn, everything else will seem a lot easier. With good vision, we can start strategizing about the best line choices.