[part0016.xhtml] Chapter 10: Shifting
================================================================================
Total Control

## Chapter 10: Shifting

One of the easiest ways to gauge the experience level of a rider is to watch how he shifts. Because shifting is required so often in riding and because sloppy shifting makes the ride uncomfortable, experienced riders learn how to do it by feel. However, even many experienced riders take too much time to shift. Shifting efficiently is important because during the time between shifts, the rider is especially vulnerable. When a sudden change in speed is required, like when a car pulls into your lane, it’s vital to be able to accelerate immediately. If you’re caught up in the shifting, you won’t be able to speed up in an emergency.

Racers, especially drag racers, have turned shifting into an art form. A look at accelerometer data from a race bike reveals an incredibly short amount of time—and speed—is lost in the shifting process. If you’re traveling in a straight line, that translates into faster acceleration. In a turn, it means you can hold a steady line and avoid the suspension unloading and the resultant loss of traction and control. If you want to find the optimum shift points for your bike, take it to a shop with a rear-wheel dynamometer. You want the bike to shift at the point where it will enter the next gear at an rpm equal to the engine’s torque peak. A list of shops is available online at www.dynojet.com or you can call Dynojet at (800) 992-3525.

Racing two-stroke 125 GP bikes taught the author the importance of quick shifts and proper gear selection. With less than 45 hp and a razor-thin powerband, racers must constantly row up and down the six gears to keep the bike in the 1,500-rpm “money-making” range.

Upshifting

Quick, efficient upshifts are pretty easy to master once you take the time to practice the technique. It should be noted, however, that some bikes, like pre-1999 BMWs and Harley-Davidsons, pre-2000 Moto Guzzis, Gold Wings, and all air-cooled Buells, will never shift well without significant internal and/or external modifications. For this reason, all make poor choices for high-performance riding in stock condition, as they cannot be trusted to make reliable shifts mid-corner. Owners of these bikes who don’t want to invest in the modifications, some of which are very expensive, will have to plan ahead for shifting. This means being prepared for slower corner speeds and for short shifting, or shifting before the torque peak, so a mid-corner shift is not necessary.

Preloading the shift lever with your foot will significantly reduce the time required to shift. On the track that means faster lap times. On the street it means easier transitions between gears for a smoother ride.

Figure 10.1
Comparing the speed over time on a GSX-R600 with conventional shifting (blue) vs. an electronic quick-shifter (red) is astonishing. Because the shifts happen so fast, the dyno software doesn’t show the minute change in speed during the shift except under very high magnification. Using the clutchless upshifting technique yields a result closer to the red line.

In upshifting the primary goal is to reduce the amount of time that we are not accelerating. As you can see on the graph the red line shows how we lose speed each time we pull in the clutch and shift, making us vulnerable to vehicles trying to get into our space. Ideally, we can minimize acceleration loss by performing clutchless upshifting. For years race bikes have used quick-shifters like the one shown to shift gears without having to close the throttle. Nowadays even some street bikes are starting to come stock with them. They work by having a sensor detect movement in the shift linkage from the rider’s foot and then cut the ignition for about 50 milliseconds. This unloads the transmission and allows it to easily shift into the next higher gear. While we may not all have quick-shifters on our bikes, we can accomplish almost the same result by mimicking the “cutting-power” action with our throttles.

More bikes like this Triumph Jason Disalvo Daytona 675 Race Replica are starting to come with quick-shifters. They detect movement in the shift linkage and cut the ignition for approximately 50 milliseconds to allow for full and partial throttle upshifts without use of the clutch.

The first step in basic upshifting technique involves making sure the engine is under full load. This means full throttle and usually—but not necessarily—super-high rpm. The second is preloading the shift lever by pulling your foot up with just slightly less force than that needed to engage the next gear. Next, quickly roll off the throttle approximately 10–20 percent of its twisting range and back on to full throttle. The wrist movement here should be as small and as fast as possible, not unlike blinking an eye. When this happens, the torque force on the transmission will temporarily unload, and the preloaded shift lever will now snick into the next gear.

Quick, precise shifts will be especially valued by passengers. You’ll also appreciate not getting bonked in the back of the head.

For full-throttle “speed shifting,” no clutch is necessary. In fact, it’s actually harder on the transmission to use the clutch in this type of situation than to just let the loading forces do the job. Most riders are amazed the first time they find that they don’t need to use the clutch in high-performance shifting. These techniques will make the ride noticeably smoother for passengers as well. Remember that this assumes a full engine load. At small throttle openings, there is no need for fast upshifts so you should shift as normal.

Downshifting

High-performance downshifting is significantly more difficult than upshifting and requires some dedicated practice time to get the feel for it. The most important aspect of downshifting is to match the engine speed with the wheel speed. If the engine speed is too low, the rear wheel will start hopping as it struggles to regain traction, which could result in a nasty crash. This is probably the number one problem novice road racers face when they begin learning to go fast.

Downshifting by just pulling in the clutch, downshifting the transmission, and letting out the clutch causes the engine to have to catch up to the speed of the rear wheel. This resistance causes the tire to break traction, puts undue wear on the clutch, and makes the motorcycle jerk as the clutch is let out.

Some modern day sportbikes have what’s called a “slipper clutch,” or “back torque limiting clutch.” A slipper clutch is designed to have the clutch plates freewheel until the engine speed catches up with the wheel speed. I look at slipper clutches the same way as quick-shifters and ABS. They are all great technology to have. But if you don’t understand what they’re doing, it can be dangerous when you change to bikes that don’t have that feature. This includes when that technology fails. In other words, you don’t want to rely on the technology. It is there just in case, not as a replacement for good technique.

The correct technique for downshifting involves turning, or blipping, the throttle about 50 percent of its twisting travel at the instant the clutch is disengaged by pulling in on the lever. Once the clutch is disengaged, the blip will quickly increase engine rpm. At this point you should quickly engage the lower gear. When the clutch is re-engaged by letting the lever back out, the new lower gear ratio will require the higher rpm to smoothly blend engine speed to the new rear-wheel speed. Although it’s possible to over-blip the throttle in this situation, it’s highly unlikely and has little negative effect on the bike. When beginning to learn this technique, you’re far better off erring on the side of too much rpm than not enough. By listening carefully to a superbike or Moto GP race at the track or on television, you will hear the blipping of the bikes as they slow down for a corner. Don’t worry if this sounds overwhelming. Just take plenty of time to practice this statically (with the bike stopped and off) before trying it at speed.

Figure 10.2
Downshift Sequence
There are two parts necessary to downshift properly. The first one is complicated. And the second one is more complicated! In Part 1, you want to simultaneously roll off the throttle and apply the front brake. Part 2 has us simultaneously maintaining even pressure on the brake while we quickly roll on and off the throttle, quickly engage and disengage the clutch, while at the same time quickly downshifting.

In a 2001 road race at Summit Point Raceway, the author gets a holeshot from all the way in the back row of the lightweight class. Effective clutch use with quick shifts was worth more than raw horsepower as several of the bikes pictured had as much as a 10–20-hp advantage over the #311 SV650.

Drag Race Starts

It takes many years of practice to master fast starting and, to make it worse, every bike requires a little different procedure. However, one technique that seems to work for all of them is to start with both feet off the pegs and your weight as far forward as possible. This lets the weight of your legs act like the balancing pole of a tightrope walker, which is especially important on high-horsepower bikes that have a tendency to wheelie. I also like to keep a steady rpm and do most of the work with the clutch. The exact rpm will depend on the bike, and like the shift point, it should ideally happen at the horsepower peak and end up close to the torque peak after it engages the next gear. The fewer controls you operate at the same time, the more effective you’ll be with each one.

While big wheelies look cool and can be fun, they don’t make for fast starts. Ideally, the front wheel should just barely skim the ground. This is the point of highest acceleration where the maximum amount of force is being applied to a given wheelbase and center of gravity. The longer the wheelbase and lower the weight, the more acceleration force can be applied, which is why drag bikes are so long and low. Once the bike begins to wheelie more than a few inches off the ground, additional power makes it want to flip over backwards, rather than accelerate forward. One way to help combat excessive wheelieing on high-horsepower, short-wheelbased sportbikes is to shift early (short-shift) so the engine falls below the torque peak on the next gear. Some bikes are even coming from the factory with electronic wheelie control, but this should also only be used just in case you screw up, and should not be something to rely on for every day hard acceleration.

Like all skills, drag race starts require lots of practice to master, but be mindful of clutch wear. It doesn’t take many high-rpm practice starts to destroy a new (or not so new) set of clutch plates. Heat is the enemy here, so let the clutch cool down between runs and it will last much longer.