[part0015.xhtml] Chapter 9: Throttle Control
================================================================================
Total Control

## Chapter 9: Throttle Control

The single most important control on your motorcycle is the throttle. This is because it applies forces to so many aspects of your bike’s handling including: traction, suspension, weight transfer, steering, stability, ground clearance, and of course, speed. Knowing how to skillfully apply the throttle is one of the major distinctions between good riders and great riders.

Throttle Effects

To understand proper throttle usage, you first need to be aware of what happens to the bike when the throttle is applied in either direction. In a straight line, the throttle obviously causes the engine speed to increase, propelling the bike forward. As this goes on, other happenings also take place.

Because motorcycle tires have variable profiles, your effective gearing changes depending on lean angle. For example, when the bike leans over, the contact patch moves to the outside portion of the tire where the circumference is smaller. This is the same as having shorter gearing, which raises the number of engine revolutions per minute, or rpm. However, a steady throttle doesn’t necessarily accelerate in these situations. In fact, in some turns, the bike can slow down unless you are constantly adding throttle because of the speed lost to wind resistance and tire friction. This is especially true in high-speed turns where straightening out the bike adds enough virtual gearing to require a downshift, even at full throttle settings.

Although you might imagine that the rear suspension would squat as the weight transfers to the rear tire, it, in fact, rises. This is because of the torque reaction on the rear wheel. As you no doubt know from experience, the front suspension also wants to rise when accelerating. That means the bike gets taller under acceleration. For bikes with limited lean-over capability, this can be quite useful in a corner because it adds ground clearance while countering the squatting effects of centrifugal force.

If you want to test this out, just put your front tire against a wall and let the clutch out slightly in first gear with the engine at idle. You’ll notice how the torque effect of the drive system actually raises up the rear of the motorcycle. This is true no matter what type of drive system your motorcycle has—chain, shaft, or belt. It is actually most noticeable with shaft drive. So if both the front and rear of the bike rise up under throttle, the ground clearance increases whenever you’re on the gas. This means you want to avoid chopping off the throttle in the middle of a corner because with less ground clearance, you have a smaller safety margin.

Although you can slowly change direction while being hard on the throttle, quick steering and heavy throttle generally don’t mix well because of the aforementioned weight transfer to the rear of the bike. For this reason, it’s best to do any quick flicks before getting hard on the gas, as seen in Figure 9.1. Ideally we want to use the throttle to keep the weight even on both wheels so we have the best ground clearance and good traction.

When rolling off the throttle, the bike pitches forward, transferring weight to the front tire. Doing this too quickly is a common occurrence even for experienced riders. The faster you roll off, the faster and harder the bike will pitch forward, which can cause all kinds of handling problems if done at an inopportune time. The same can be said for quickly releasing the brakes, which has the same effect as quickly applying the throttle. Combining the last two actions, as many novice sport riders tend to do, makes the bike extremely unstable and wheelie prone. The fix for this is to have a transition period where you are doing both actions simultaneously.

One of the important things to remember about suspension is that it works best in the sweet spot, or the middle of its travel range. By being in the middle of its stroke while going through a curve, 50 percent of the travel is available for bumps and 50 percent is available for dips. That prepares it equally well for whatever the road throws at it.

When your suspension is set up properly, being on the throttle in the corners helps the bike stay in this range. So that means you want to be “on the gas” as early as possible while cornering. It doesn’t take much throttle to stabilize the chassis.

Former World Superbike and 250 GP Champion John Kocinski was famous for his masterful throttle control. His touch was so deft, in fact, that he was able to run markedly more compliant suspension settings than other riders his weight because he didn’t upset the chassis with excessive throttle movements.

The next time you go riding, try the same corner both while coasting through it and while being on the gas. The difference in chassis stability will seem like the difference between night and day. Once you do this comparison, you’ll never want to ride through a corner off the gas again.

Anyone who has ever had the pleasure of watching John Kocinski or Freddie Spencer enter a corner and get on the throttle should be familiar with this technique. When Kocinski was racing 250 GP bikes, he could get on the throttle with the grace of a ballet dancer. Back when he was still racing in the AMA nationals, I remember watching him decimate the world’s best 250cc riders at the 1989 Laguna Seca USGP. I marveled at his ability to get on the throttle so smoothly that I would not have been able to tell when he got back on it had I not been there to hear the engine sound change. That same finesse helped Kocinski win a World Superbike crown on Honda’s notoriously finicky RC45.

Figure 9.1
This illustration depicts a high-speed turn where the rider is doing a lot of trail braking (see Chapter 11: Braking) upon entry. Notice how rapidly the bike gets leaned over and how the throttle is being applied before the brakes are completely released. This helps minimize the weight transfer to the rear, which keeps the suspension balanced for better traction during acceleration. As you can see the application of throttle is inversely proportional to lean angle on exit.

Spencer arguably had even better control. In his GP days, he was able to charge turns so fast that when the front tire started sliding from being overloaded, he could keep the bike from crashing by adding just enough throttle to relieve some pressure so the front tire could regain grip, somehow without high-siding. Using this technique on the three-cylinder Honda NS500, he had his competitors convinced that his bike had better torque coming off the corners than their more powerful four-cylinder bikes. In fact, rumor has it that the memory of those battles was one of the reasons Kenny Roberts chose a three-cylinder engine configuration for his ill-fated Modenas 500 GP bike.

Of course, that kind of riding is not for mere mortals like us. But it does show you what’s possible when you combine lots of practice with exceptional sensitivity and reflexes.

Unlike the days of manually changing carburetor jets for the best throttle response, fuel injection tuning is now done on dynamometers with computer software changes. Pictured is a Bazzaz Principia dyno being used to set up the fuel map for a GSX-R1000. The top of the line system uses the same controller for the fuel map, quick-shifter and traction control.

Corner Exits

No matter who you are, good throttle control relies on a smoothly operating fuel delivery system. Although it’s rare these days to see a carbureted bike with major surging problems, many fuel-injected bikes still struggle with this problem, making it difficult to smoothly get back on the gas. In his Cycle World editorial column, “Top Dead Center,” Kevin Cameron once noted fuel-injection problems with Matt Mladin’s GSX-R750. After repeatedly watching Mladin come through a turn, Cameron noticed the point at which Mladin could get back on the gas was considerably later than the riders of the factory Ducatis he was racing. Cameron hypothesized that this was caused by the fuel-injection system’s inability to deliver a small enough quantity of fuel when the throttle was first cracked open, causing a small jerk upon delivery. Because of this, Mladin had to wait until the bike was more vertical so it could handle the hit without seesawing out of control. This is important because going fast, especially on the track, is all about good exit speed.

Exit speed is primarily affected by bike lean. The more the bike is leaned, the less you can apply the throttle. As seen in the chart on the facing page, bike lean and throttle opening are negatively correlated. As one goes down, the other goes up due to the finite amount of traction available at any one time.

This makes the throttle application point or the point in the curve where you are able to get on and stay on the throttle for the remainder of the curve, the best metric for determining proper corner entry speed. A good rule of thumb is if you find that you’re halfway or more through a corner before you get on the gas, you’re coming in too fast and riding over your head. Even if you feel you’re in control of the bike, if you’re past the 50 percent point of a turn before rolling on the throttle, your entry speed was too fast for your skill level. That means that you need to slow down your entry speed to whatever it needs to be, so that you can get on the throttle as soon as the bike is leaned over. Obviously, as you practice this and get better, your entry speed will be able to increase, but be mindful of your throttle application point to know when you are riding beyond your skill level.

Traction control can be a tremendous confidence booster on a motorcycle and is coming stock on more bikes these days. Some companies like Bazzaz offer it as an aftermarket upgrade. Pictured (top) is a screen shot of the Bazzaz software that allows the user to program each gear and rpm range with varying amounts of traction control depending on conditions. An optional rotary dial (below) allows easy external adjustments to the system while riding. Note the attached fuel map switch to the right of the dial. It can have two pre-programmed settings for, say, performance and fuel economy.

The amount of available throttle increases as the bike stands up, but it’s better to start sooner and apply it slower than to wait and do it all at once. As mentioned earlier, this is because a smooth, steady increase of throttle keeps the suspension in the sweet spot, whereas a fast application can create additional problems. Taking the time for some specific throttle control practice will help you find the correct rate of throttle application for your bike and riding style.

Practice

It’s best to first practice throttle control in a straight line. This can be done almost anywhere. My favorite drills originated from Freddie Spencer. The first drill is to practice rolling on and off the throttle slowly, smoothly, and consistently. When I say slowly, I mean very slowly, especially when rolling off the throttle. I’ve found that what most of my students consider slowly rolling off the throttle is generally three times faster than it needs to be. It will, in fact, seem almost painfully slow. You know you are doing it right when the suspension barely moves up and down without any jerkiness. For those of you on fuel-injected BMWs, or any other bike with rough off-idle response, this will be very tricky, but well worth the effort. It also helps if your throttle cable is properly adjusted with virtually no slack.

After mastering rolling on and off the throttle, the next step is to transition back and forth with the brakes. See Chapter 11: Braking for a description of this technique known as trail braking.

Throttle Setup and Maintenance

Adjusting the extra slack out of your throttle cable can greatly improve throttle control, especially right off idle. It’s important to check the cable when the steering is at both the left and right steering stops to make sure it’s not tight enough to cause the throttle to open by itself. Adjustments can be either made by hand (top) or with tools (middle). It is a good idea to familiarize yourself with any throttle cable adjustment before you head onto the road or track. Bikes may perform very different with even a small adjustment, and you don’t want to be surprised when there is no longer a hesitation between rolling on the throttle and hard acceleration.

Another improvement that can be made to bikes with overly aggressive (or passive) throttles is to use replacement cam-type throttle tubes such as the G2 Throttle Tamer (www.g2ergo.com). The Throttle Tamer has a cam with a reduced radius initially, which requires a slightly farther rotation to achieve the same carburetor or throttle body-opening position as a stock throttle. This minimizes the jerky “throttle snatch” especially evident in modern fuel-injected street bikes.

Over time cable-operated throttles will pick up dust, debris, and various schmutz that will require cleaning for smooth operation. The best solution is to get a cable luber like this model (bottom) from Motion Pro (www.motionpro.com). It covers the cable end and allows you to use an aerosol can to force a liquid into the housing that cleans and lubricates the cable. Grips are also important to keep from rubbing against the throttle assembly and bar ends/hand guards. Always test throttle action before you start the bike to make sure there is no binding in the system.