[part0026.xhtml] Chapter 20: Riding Gear
================================================================================
Total Control

## Chapter 20: Riding Gear

About 2,500 years ago, the Taoist sage Chuang Tze described the ideal relationship between rider and gear. He said, “When the shoe fits, the foot is forgotten.” Similarly, when riding gear fits, the body is forgotten. This is an important point because improperly fitting riding gear is not only distracting and uncomfortable, but it also may bind your movements. Either scenario could actually cause a crash, which is the last thing your riding gear should be doing.

Riding gear is designed to keep you comfortable on the road and to protect you from the weather or the ground, should you go down. Indeed, properly chosen and fitted gear can make the difference between a joyous and disastrous ride. All motorcycle apparel represents a compromise between comfort and protection. It’s generally easy to achieve either one, but excelling at both is a true art form. Where the best gear falls on the comfort/protection continuum depends on what is most important to you. Making an educated decision on riding gear requires an understanding of quality, materials, and construction.

Although certain riding gear manufacturers have better-quality products than others, you can’t judge gear based solely on brand. This is because there is virtually always a quality range within any given brand. There are several areas of importance regarding quality.

Country of Origin

Where a product is made can say a lot about what you can expect from it, but there are no hard and fast rules. Ultimately, the quality of a product comes down to meeting price goals, which are determined by labor, material, and distribution costs. Industrialized nations with strong economies, like the United States, Germany, and Japan, can produce first-class products, but they have very high labor costs. This is why many companies produce products overseas. Countries with weaker economies and a cheaper labor force, like Pakistan and China, can produce labor-intensive products like jackets, boots, and gloves for much less than developed nations can. When it comes to simple apparel items like T-shirts, where the majority of the cost is in the material, any country can be competitive.

Because most riding gear is very technical, or labor intensive, the vast majority of it is produced in the Far East. For example, most Harley-Davidson gear is made in Pakistan, and the bulk of apparel from companies like Icon and Speed and Strength comes from China. Even well-respected companies like Held that previously made all its apparel in Germany now makes most of it in cheaper countries.

Economics

The majority of motorcycle products sold in the industry must travel from distributors to retailers before they reach you. This is one of the main reasons why riding gear is so expensive.

Let’s take a typical pair of $250 retail motorcycle boots as an example. The actual cost of manufacturing the boots is about $44. The overseas factory that makes it sells it for $63 to the “manufacturer,” which, in many cases, should more accurately be called an importer. The importer sells them for around $97 to the warehouse distributor (WD). The WD sells them for around $150 to the retailer. And the retailer who sells the boots to you will then raise the price to around $250.

On the other end of the spectrum is the domestic, high-end specialty manufacturer that must sell its products direct to the consumers. If it used the same distribution method as the mass marketer, those same boots would have to be priced at around $1,000 to make the same profit margin for the manufacturer. That’s why they have to be sold direct where they will retail for about $425. One of the main advantages of buying from a domestic manufacturer is that the manufacturer can stand behind its product and make repairs down the road. Quality control is also easier when the items are manufactured on the company’s premises rather than on the other side of the planet.

Materials

One of the biggest decisions to make when purchasing a piece of riding gear is deciding on the material. Natural hides have traditionally been the choice of motorcycle riders because they are abrasion resistant and durable. This is why virtually all racing suits are made of leather. But all leathers are not the same. Elkskin, deerskin, and kangaroo are more abrasion and tear resistant than cowhide, and, unlike cowhide, can be washed without getting hard and dry. Of course, they are also more expensive. Kangaroo has the highest strength-to-weight ratio, but because it is so thin, a small deviation from a given thickness can jeopardize its integrity. It’s also difficult to get large pieces of this type of leather, which is why you don’t see a lot of one-piece suits made out of kangaroo hide.

When leathers go through the tanning process, the type and amount of dye used is important. Too much dye or the wrong types of it can reduce the strength of the leather and “bleed” on your body. If the dye is completely saturated through the hide, too much of it was used. The amount of bleed also depends on the pH balance of your skin. If you have very acidic skin, it’s best to stay with lighter-colored leathers since they won’t bleed as much as darker leathers.

There are newer processes for leather that can make hides waterproof as well as machine washable and machine dryable, but they are expensive. I have been enjoying a jacket like this for several years, and it definitely makes natural hides a much more attractive option.

Natural hides may be the standard motorcycle attire, but synthetic materials are becoming increasingly popular. Synthetic materials generally fall into two categories. The first category is nylon, better known under its Dupont brand name Cordura, which comes in many thicknesses and densities. The second category is called aramid, also better known under its Dupont brand name Kevlar.

A good protective garment needs to be tough enough to withstand the abrasive forces of a crash, yet be elastic enough to not let the shearing forces of the road tear it up on impact. This is similar to the way a suspension system keeps the bumps from tearing a motorcycle chassis apart. High-performance nylons have very good strength and are fairly stretchable. Aramids have excellent strength and practically don’t stretch at all. This is why suits made with aramids must be blended with a stretchy material like Spandex to allow them the needed flexibility, or have sophisticated constructions to allow adequate movement. An example of this blend is Schoeller Keprotec, which is 30 percent aramid weave and 70 percent Spandex.

The best gear is transparent to the rider, effortlessly following his lead and never getting in the way. On a hot day, it doesn’t hurt to have a powered cooling system, either.

Of course, it doesn’t do you any good to have strong materials if the thread sewing them together isn’t up to the task. When it comes to thread on leathers, heavy-duty nylons are generally a better choice than aramids because they can stretch when stressed. When under high loads, non-stretching aramids end up cutting through leather like a cheese knife. So, although the thread is strong, the seam ends up being weak. In fact, many popular escape and evasion (E&E) kits include Kevlar cord to be used as a saw to cut through all sorts of things. YouTube has many videos showing this.

Construction

How a piece of gear is put together is just as important as what it is made of. Remember, every seam on a garment is a potential weak point. Therefore, the fewer seams, the better. Cheap jackets and pants use many separate pieces of leather because it is cheaper to buy the hides that way. Knowing the ideal suit construction is particularly important if you are thinking of adding graphics to your attire. It is much wiser to have the graphics as thin appliqués on top of the leather than to cut the pattern of the suit based on the graphic elements. It’s always more expensive to add graphics rather than just change colors along the natural lines of the suit’s pattern.

The stitching style is just as important as the thread material and construction patterns. There are many types of seams and the more strength a seam needs, the more important it is that it be shielded from outside abrasion.

It should be noted that every hole you put in leather makes it weaker. Many garments use too many stitches within too little space, often using tiny thread that turns the seam into the equivalent of perforated paper. Ventilation holes should have at least 0.6 inches of space between each one. If they are any closer than that, the risk of perforation tears is very high.

Armor

The protective padding used in motorcycle apparel varies greatly in terms of its ability to absorb impacts. The best padding uses high-tech foams (also called dilatant, non-Newtonian fluids) specifically engineered to absorb mechanical energy. D3O is currently the most well-known brand, with companies like Aerostich and BMW having their own proprietary version of a similar technology.

You want to avoid any padding that doesn’t have some flexibility as it will either transfer energy directly to the rider or create high-pressure “hot” spots that will cut or abrade through the outer layer in a crash.

It doesn’t matter what the armor is made of if it doesn’t stay in place. A lot of the current mesh-type jackets don’t have the strength or fit to keep the armor in place during a fall. Of course, if the choice is between a mesh jacket or nothing at all, then some protection is always better than none. While mesh suits may provide adequate protection for sedate riding, if you are going to engage in high-performance sport riding you will want apparel that offers more protection.

Riding Suits

When it comes to high-performance riding, one-piece suits or zip-together, two-piece suits are a better choice than regular “separates.” The reason for this is because in a slide, a non-attached jacket will tend to bunch up, exposing the rider’s midsection to abrasion.

Deciding on leather versus textile is a little more difficult. Leather is heavier and warmer on hot days but has better abrasion resistance, with good suits able to be repaired after most crashes. Textile suits, on the other hand, are lighter and more comfortable for casual riding. The best ones can protect you from most crashes. The more comfortable ones are often only good for one serious crash, however, in which case they will sacrifice themselves to save your hide. Remember that even the most expensive suit is less expensive than a skin graft at your local emergency room.

For general street riding, I prefer textile suits as they have features like pockets for storage and are good at accommodating different layer combinations depending on temperature. I’m especially fond of suits from Aerostich (aerostich.com), BMW (bmwmotorcycles.com), Klim (klim.com), and Rukka (rukka.com), which can range in price from reasonable to yikes!

Street riding suits come in many styles and materials. Three of the author’s favorites are (from left to right): BMW TourShell (long-distance touring), Aerostich Transit 2 (daily commuting), and Klim Badlands (adventure-touring).

The primary disadvantages to textile suits for aggressive street riding is slipperiness on the tank/seat, somewhat limited flexibility, and the inability to sew knee puck Velcro to them without compromising their waterproofness. For the latter, I produced a “strap-on” system (see above) that gives riders the ability to temporarily add knee pucks to any suit by simply strapping them to the outside of their pants.

If you need to ride to work in nice clothes and don’t care about extreme flexibility, the American-made, one-piece Aerostich Roadcrafter and Motoport Ultra Trek (motoport.com) suits comfortably fit over business suits as well as normal clothes.

Total Control’s (totalcontroltraining.net) convenient Strap-Ons allow a rider to temporarily add knee pucks to any pants. They work with virtually any sliders and prevent leaks in waterproof pants by eliminating the need to sew through the material.

If you want textile separates but can’t quite afford top-end quality, Rev’It! (revitusa.com), BMG (britishmotorcyclegear.com), Olympia (olympiamotosports.com), and First Gear (firstgear-usa.com) offer some very good jackets and pants at reasonable prices.

Recently Aerostich released its Transit 2 waterproof leather two-piece suit (see photo), which has become my go-to suit when I travel for teaching classes. It gives you most of the benefits of both leather and textile. I’ve even used it for occasional track-day duty.

If you’re really into track days or racing, leather is your best choice. I highly recommend getting a custom suit from one of the local manufacturers. In the United States, Z Custom (zcustom.com), Bates (batesleathers.com), Vanson (vansonleathers.com), and Syed (syedleathers.com) all make high-quality leathers. There are undoubtedly other good domestic producers but I have not had any personal experience with them. Ask local riders for opinions of various others. For the same price as a good set of off-the-rack leathers, do yourself a favor and get them custom made locally. Not only will they fit you perfectly, but also the manufacturers will be able to do repairs on them in the future.

Custom-fitted suits like this one from Syed Leathers are often no more expensive than high-quality, off-the-rack suits, yet can provide a perfect fit. Buying a domestically manufactured suit makes getting repairs, alterations, and cleanings a lot faster and easier.

Gloves

Proper fitting gloves are essential for high-performance riding as they are the interface between you and the bike’s primary controls. In fact, I feel so strongly about their importance that I began manufacturing my own brand of gloves (leeparksdesign.com) as I wasn’t happy with what was being offered by the major manufacturers.

Because dexterity and feel are so important, you want to have soft, flexible leathers to transmit the most chassis data to the rider. For this reason, the best leathers for gloves are deerskin, elkskin, kangaroo, calfskin, lambskin, Pittards, and Japanese-dyed cowhide. These soft leathers are prone to stretching so it’s important that they fit snugly when you first buy them, or they will become sloppy after you’ve had them for a while. For street or track riding stay away from the synthetic leathers used in mechanics gloves like Lorica, Clarino, and Chamude, as they do not possess the abrasion resistance necessary to protect you in a high-speed crash. They can be fine for the lower speeds (and softer surface) of pure off-road riding, however.

Good riding gloves should have extra protection in the high abrasion areas of the knuckles and palm, and have a retention strap to keep them on in a crash. All riding gear should have as few seams as possible to minimize the chances of them coming apart. The DeerSports gloves produced by the author (leeparksdesign.com) shown below, feature a seamless palm and only four seams in the entire glove, for superior structural integrity. The somewhat similar appearing pair of gloves shown above has some dark secrets under its patches. The top of the glove has two structural seams where the top layer was cut out and replaced with a foam-padded section. Under the palm patch is a large horizontal cut with the leather held together with tape and Kevlar thread.

Any true motorcycle glove should have a second protective layer on the high-abrasion areas of the palm and the knuckles. Hard carbon-fiber knuckle “protectors,” the current fad in gloves, are a poor choice. This is because upon hard impacts carbon fiber can shatter, creating a nasty edge of epoxy-reinforced carbon-fiber “needles” that can penetrate into your hand and other places. If you like the big knuckle look, go for one of the plastic or hard shoe leather versions offered by some manufacturers. As discussed earlier, you should be wary of over-complicated, patched-together designs with tiny threads as they are much more likely to come apart in a crash. Also make sure the gloves have a good retention system so they stay on your hands. Work gloves are designed to come on and off easily so they are not a good choice for riding.

Boots

Once upon a time not all that long ago it was possible to buy high-quality boots that would last for many years. Nowadays, the market is littered with low-quality boots made of inferior synthetic materials. They are cluttered with lots of cheap plastic do-dads stuck on the outside to try and add back some protection. Unfortunately, some time ago manufacturers learned that if they made fancy looking but non-resoleable boots out of inexpensive materials, they could sell more boots when the originals wore out prematurely. Fortunately, there are still a few companies, like Z Custom and Bates, making all-leather sport boots with good ankle padding and replaceable soles.

In racing boots, there are many sophisticated designs with all kinds of plastic and composite protection should you have a serious crash. The good ones are not cheap, and the cheap ones are not good. Like most things in life, you get what you pay for. Hardly any have replaceable soles, so you will have to throw them away when the sole wears out. None are comfortable enough to comfortably walk around in all day, either, so you probably will need to bring a change of shoes for any extended street outings. Supermoto-specific boots have replaceable sections of their soles because they often get dragged like dirt-track boots. This feature would be nice on regular boots in the high-wear areas as well.

Cruiser and touring riders still have several good options available, which often include waterproofing. Unfortunately you generally have to choose between lightweight and longevity.

When trying on boots, make sure they will fit not only your foot, but whatever gear you will be wearing when you ride. For instance, racing leathers have thick shin guards that the boots must fit over. If you have large calves like me, you may have to go custom to get them wide enough. Similarly, if you like to wear your boots under your jeans make sure they won’t be too large to fit under the cuffs of your pants. Also check that the boots have enough flexibility in the ankle area for your style of riding.

Most premium racing boots offer great protection and ventilation but at the cost of comfort and waterproofness. Most touring boots have the opposite results. A few modern “crossover” boots like this SportDry model from BMW allow you to have footwear that is both protective and waterproof, but gets a little warm on hot days. Choose your compromise.

Helmets

As the single most important piece of safety gear, a helmet is one thing on which you don’t want to skimp. The old Bell Helmets advertising slogan still rings true. It read, “If you have a $10 head, wear a $10 helmet.”

A proper-fitting helmet will be snug but not constricting. It’s generally a good idea to go with as small a helmet as you can comfortably wear. This is because the liner will compress over time making it larger, and too large a size can rotate over your eyes or even come off in a crash. Not only is size important, but so is the helmet’s internal shape. We all have differently shaped heads, and some helmets will fit your shape much better than others. Some manufacturers even have different liner shapes for different models. The wrong shape will give you headaches at the points of highest pressure. As an example, when Schuberth came out with the C3 modular helmet, it was so painful as to make me cry “uncle” within 15 seconds of putting it on. Due to a liner design change, the C3 Pro—on the other hand—was immediately comfortable enough for me to ride all day without discomfort.

The more helmets you try on, the better your chances of getting a proper fit. This is why it’s best to go to a local dealer. Don’t buy mail order unless you know for sure that you fit a particular model. Keep in mind that retailers hate nothing more than being used as a fitting room for a mail order sale. So, try to support your local retailer if he deserves your business by giving you good service. Don’t forget to keep the helmet on for as long as you can in the store because some comfort problems won’t show up in the first minute of wear.

There is a lot of confusion over helmet ratings. For helmets sold in the United States, the Department of Transportation’s Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard (DOT FMVSS), Economic Commission for Europe (ECE), and the Snell Foundation (Snell) all certify helmets that meet specific criteria relating to impact absorption, shell penetration, retention, and peripheral vision.

Since the first edition of Total Control I have had a change of opinion on these standards. In 2004 I had a bad concussion wearing a Snell certified helmet. It was approximately a 30-mph crash on a dirt section of a supermoto course. As the only real brain injury I’ve ever experienced, I wouldn’t wish one on my worst enemy. They are debilitating in a most dehumanizing way.

I was confused about how such a seemingly mild crash had such terrible consequences until a year later when Motorcyclist magazine published a landmark article called “Blowing the Lid Off.” It was prompted by several staffers/contributors having recently had concussions and wanting to find out why. The magazine scientifically tested sample helmets from several standards only to discover that the then current Snell standards were, in fact, too hard. Too much energy was transferred to the headform (read: brain).

High-end helmets like the C3 Pro (left) and S2 (right) from Schuberth epitomize what you get for the extra money. This includes significantly less wind noise, lighter weight with better aerodynamics for less neck strain, pull-down sunshields for taming bright light, efficient ventilation for keeping cool in hot weather, optically clear shields for better vision and moisture wicking/washable/customizable liners. Comfort is based on personal head shapes so you must try on any helmet before purchasing one. Any proper fitting full-face or modular helmet that meets ECE and/or DOT standards will provide decent protection, regardless of price.

Because the Snell Memorial Foundation makes money by licensing their name on stickers used by the manufacturers to show compliance with their standards, this article became a major revenue drain. They lost so much money from the aftermath of that article, in fact, that the newest Snell standard as of this writing (M2010) is much closer to the current ECE Standard (22.05). Close enough that even I was cautiously willing to try it again in the Arai dual-sport helmet shown here with the Klim suit. There are reasons why no other country (other than our next-door neighbor Canada) sells Snell-approved helmets, and I doubt it’s because everyone else is stupid.

The bottom line is Snell M2010-certified helmets are probably OK, but you can’t go wrong with any DOT FMVSS No. 218 and ECE 22.05-certified helmet. If you have a Snell M2005 or older helmet, it’s time to retire it. Under no circumstance should you ever wear a non-DOT-approved (also known as novelty) helmet.

Unlike body armor or even football helmets, motorcycle helmets are designed to work only once. They absorb energy through the crushing of their foam liners. The purpose of the hard outer shell is to distribute the load over as much of the surface of the foam lining as possible and to protect against penetration. That means that even if the outside shell looks OK, the liner may still be compromised. The final word on replacement is if you’ve been in an accident, and your head hit the ground, chances are good you need a new helmet. Most of the helmet manufacturers will give you a free inspection if you want to make sure you really need a new one.

Despite what some manufacturers say, a good helmet can provide up to 10 years of worthwhile protection if, and this is a big if, it was taken care of properly. You can increase the life span of your helmet by never putting it on top of your gas tank and never leaving it in the garage where gas and solvent fumes can degrade the foam liner. Proper care also means never resting the helmet on a mirror, sissy bar, or anything else that puts pressure on a small area of the liner because this will create an indentation. It’s also a good idea to periodically clean the comfort liner. Plus, you should also refrain from wearing the same helmet every day so that your helmets will have a chance to breathe.

Unlike 15 years ago when there were just a small handful of high-quality helmets, there are now a variety of great brands to choose from. The important things to keep in mind are that they all fit differently and have various features. Go with the model that best fits your head and has the comfort/features/aesthetics that you desire. And never buy a helmet over the Internet that you have not tried on before, regardless of reviews.