[part0009.xhtml] Chapter 3: Suspension
================================================================================
Total Control

## Chapter 3: Suspension

While the stock suspension and factory settings may be adequate for basic riding, as soon as a rider’s skill increases so too does the rider’s equipment need to increase in capability. As such, it is my belief that no real discussion of proper riding technique can take place without first understanding the basics of suspension dynamics. All of the riding techniques in this book revolve around managing traction. The knowledge about how your suspension works—and how to properly adjust it and maintain it—will work together with proper riding skill to improve your overall ability to manage traction.

Every movement and control input you make on a motorcycle affects your suspension, and what happens to your suspension happens to you. Enhanced control, better traction, and more compliance translate into improved safety, more comfort, and increased fun on the street. On top of all of that, you’ll enjoy lower lap times on the track.

Unfortunately there is a lack of accurate and easily digestible information about how suspensions work and motorcycle manufacturers don’t provide owners much useful help. In fact, many owner’s manuals have questionable instructions such as “Adjust for best comfort,” or “Turning the rebound damping screw clockwise increases rebound.” Even many dealership technicians are only taught to remove and replace parts but have virtually no training on proper setup. Let’s start by taking a theoretical look at what suspension is and how it works.

Why Suspension?

Why do we need suspension in the first place? After all, go-karts can go pretty darn fast without any. The simple answer? Bumps (well, holes too). It’s important to remember that go-karts travel over fairly smooth surfaces while motorcycles may encounter all kinds of surface imperfections. This is where suspension makes a difference. The purpose of the suspension is threefold: to minimize harshness, maximize traction, and maximize control. The ideal setup is determined by a number of factors, including the type of riding (racing or street, for example) and personal preference (some like it stiffer, some like it plusher).

Imagine the perfect ride produced by the perfect suspension. It starts with maximum traction. It’s also firm with good resistance to bottoming and great “feel” for the road, yet it is plush and comfortable at the same time. Additionally it would be consistent no matter what road we choose to ride on. Every type of rider can relate to this ideal setup—firmness for that feeling of control, and plushness because no one likes getting beat up while riding. The terms “firmness” and “plushness” seem mutually exclusive, but are they? Is this type of ride stiff or is it soft? Well, the answer is both—firm to eliminate excessive dive and control bottoming, and plush on the square edge bumps. Although it doesn’t sound logical, firmness and plushness can both be achieved with a little dose of modern technology. Before we get there, it’s important to understand the basic forces at work in any suspension system.

Forces

There are three distinct types of forces involved in suspension action: spring, damping, and frictional. There are also forces created by acceleration of the masses (component weight) involved, but they will be ignored for the purpose of this discussion.

The first type of force is spring force. The two basic types of springs are mechanical and air. Mechanical springs come in three different forms: coil, leaf, and torsion bar, with coil springs being the most common on motorcycles. The force of a coil spring depends on wire diameter, coil diameter, number of coils, and materials. Air springs on the other hand have properties like initial pressure, compression ratio, and effective piston area. The key point to remember about spring force is that it is dependent only on its position regarding the overall travel of the suspension, meaning the distance the spring is compressed. It is not affected by how fast the suspension is compressing or rebounding.

Damping force is caused when liquids are forced through some type of restriction. Therefore the damping forces depend on oil viscosity, orifice sizes, piston size, valving, shim configuration and most of all, velocity. The velocity of the oil moving through the damping circuit creates the damping force. This also means a shock creates no damping force unless there is movement of the damper unit during compression or rebound. Damping is not affected by bike movement or bike speed, only by vertical wheel velocity.

Figure 3.1
In the perfect world, the center of gravity of the sprung mass doesn’t move vertically. The wheel remains in contact with the ground at all times. This can only be achieved with active suspension where the wheel is sucked up on the face of the bump and pushed down on the back side. The technology to do this is not here yet, but this is the ideal ultimate goal.

The third type of force is frictional force. Frictional force depends on the perpendicular load on the surfaces in question and the materials involved, including lubrication, if any. The higher the load, the greater the friction between, for example, the inner tube and the bushings and seals attached to the outer fork tube.

The other factor concerning friction is whether there is movement between the surfaces. These two conditions are known as static friction, or stiction, and dynamic friction. Stiction is created when there is no movement between the surfaces; dynamic friction is created when there is movement. Stiction can be readily felt in front forks when you push down on the handlebars. Generally speaking, the breakaway resistance, or stiction, is higher than the friction after there is movement.

In some cases, frictional forces can be the biggest suspension problem, larger than the damping and spring forces combined. Low-friction materials, better surface finishes, more sophisticated lubricants, and better designs can minimize friction. Suffice it to say, as far as frictional forces are concerned, less is always better.

Most bikes use one of three basic types of springs. From left to right: straight-rate, dual-rate and true progressive-rate springs.

Energy

Forces are important, but it’s essential to understand the larger picture: energy. Springs turn kinetic energy (energy due to motion) into potential or stored energy when they’re compressed. They release energy when they recoil. Damping, on the other hand, turns mechanical energy into heat and then transfers it to the air. Friction also turns mechanical energy into heat, but its characteristics are quite different from damping forces. Why is this knowledge of energy important? There are a number of reasons. At a basic level suspension action is force and energy management. Riders also often get very concerned when their shocks get hot. Once you understand that, on an energy level, a damper’s job is to turn mechanical energy into heat, you realize it’s not a problem for the shocks to get hot. However, shock fade, a condition where the shock loses its damping, is undesirable. A well-designed shock absorber with high-quality fluid can get hot and still not fade perceptibly.

An understanding of energy helps to greatly simplify the subject of suspension. When a tire comes in contact with a bump, the suspension compresses. As it does, the spring stores some of the energy, while the damper turns some of the remaining energy into heat. The suspension slows down, stops compressing, changes direction, and starts extending or rebounding. The spring releases energy, and the damper applies rebound damping, once again turning mechanical energy into heat. If everything goes perfectly, the center of gravity of the motorcycle follows a straight line, with the wheel moving up and down beneath it. Perfect contact is maintained with the road surface. That’s how it’s supposed to work, but it’s easier said than done.

Figure 3.2
One way spring rate can be calculated is by applying a known amount of force and then dividing that amount by the distance the spring travels.

Figure 3.3
This is a force-deflection curve for two different stiffness springs. The blue spring requires .5 kg additional force for each 10mm increment through its entire range. The red spring is twice as stiff, so it has twice the slope, requiring an additional 1.0 kg for each 10mm increment.

A suspended motorcycle system is illustrated in Figure 3.1. Note that the center of gravity is separated from the wheel by the spring and the damper. Each of these components has mass or weight. Everything above the spring is considered to be “sprung mass,” and everything below the spring is considered to be “unsprung mass.” Half the spring is sprung, and half is unsprung. The portions of the damper attached to the sprung mass are considered sprung, and the portions attached to the unsprung mass are unsprung. When going over a series of bumps on that “perfect ride,” the center of gravity of the sprung mass traces a straight line as the wheel and unsprung mass move up and down, maintaining contact with the road surface and, therefore, providing ideal traction.

Springs

Everyone knows what a spring is, but few understand exactly how it works or know the differences between various types of springs. When setting up your suspension, getting the correct spring rate and preload is crucial, so it should be done before any other changes are made.

An accurate spring tester can be an invaluable tool for suspension tuners. This Intercomp basic unit will test only rear springs. A fork spring tester kit can be added on to this basic unit as well.

The most essential thing to know about springs is that the spring force is dependent on how much the spring is compressed—this is referred to as spring displacement. For example, if it takes .5 kilogram (kg) of force to compress a spring 1 millimeter (mm), the spring’s rate would be .5 kg per mm, commonly referred to as a “.5 spring.” So if you want to compress this particular spring 20mm, it would require 10 kg of weight, and so on. Thus, the amount of force the spring pushes back is dependent on how far it’s being compressed. Therefore it’s important to remember that springs are displacement (or position) sensitive.

Figure 3.4
Progressive springs gradually increase force through their travel, while dual-rate springs have a distinct “crossover point” where they change rates. Straight-rate springs have a constant spring rate.

The total spring force created in telescopic front forks is a bit more involved. This is because there is a volume of air trapped inside the fork tubes that acts like an additional spring. When front forks are compressed, the air pressure inside the fork increases, even if no initial air pressure was used in the fork. The more the fork compresses, the more progressive the “air spring” becomes. Basically, the front forks have two spring forces: 1) the mechanical spring force, and 2) the air spring.

Let’s also define what spring rate and preload really are. Spring rate is the “stiffness” of the spring, measured in kilograms per millimeter or pounds per inch. One of the ways to test spring rate is to first measure the spring’s free, or uninstalled, length. Then put some weight on it and measure the amount it compresses as shown in Figure 3.2. By placing increasingly heavier weights on the spring and measuring how much the spring compresses, a graph comparing force to displacement can be plotted.

Figure 3.5
The total spring force is a combination of mechanical spring and air spring.

Figure 3.6
This graph shows the difference between adding preload to a softer spring (blue line) compared to a stiffer rate spring (red line) with less preload. Notice that the two lines cross at the 30 mm fork travel mark. This means that both of these setups have the same amount of static sag, which demonstrates that there is much more to spring choice than just sag. The stiffer spring with less preload is a better choice if the rider is experiencing bottoming out with the alternative setup. On the other hand, if the rider is not generally using all of the available travel, the softer spring with more preload is preferable for a plusher ride.

Spring rate is defined as the change in force divided by the change in displacement. In algebraic terms, that’s spring rate (K) = (change in force)/(change in displacement). What this means is that the slope created when plotting the force in relation to the displacement is the spring rate.

There are three basic types of spring designs: straight-rate, dual-rate, and true progressive (Figure 3.4). A straight-rate spring maintains a constant rate throughout its travel and is very common in racing applications. The coils on a straight-rate spring are spaced evenly. Each additional displacement increment (millimeter or inch) takes the same amount of additional force to compress it as it goes through its entire travel.

A progressive or dual-rate spring, by contrast, changes the amount of force in relation to the position of travel. A dual-rate spring commonly has two different coil spacings along its length—one is closer together, while the other end has the coils spaced further apart. Stacking two different springs on top of each other can also create a dual-rate spring. A true progressive spring has coils that start out close together, and then are spaced progressively farther apart with each successive coil. Initially, the spring force changes only a small amount with each incremental change in displacement. As the spring compresses, the coils are progressively blocked out (the coils touch each other and therefore have no travel remaining) making its rate change gradually.

Which spring type is better is a matter of application as well as opinion, but I recommend straight-rate springs in most telescopic forks. Here’s why. When setting up the spring rates on suspension, the ideal setup is one that is progressive enough yet not too progressive. A spring rate that is not progressive enough will tend to be a compromise. It may have a tendency to feel too harsh on small bumps and additionally may bottom out when hitting a large bump. A spring rate that is too progressive will cause the suspension to drop through its travel too easily during the first part of movement, causing a mushy feeling. Additionally, as the suspension continues to compress, it may become too stiff too fast and feel harsh.

Remember that in telescopic forks there are two main spring forces: the mechanical coil spring and the air spring. By its very nature the air spring is very progressive and can easily be tuned with oil level. It’s my experience that the combination of a straight-rate spring and the naturally occurring, progressive air spring offers the best combination of front suspension progressiveness. In fact, if more progressiveness or bottoming resistance is desired, a simple increase in fork oil level may be all that is necessary.

Figure 3.7
This figure shows the relationship between spring preload and sag. It also illustrates how changing preload changes the percentage of the suspension’s travel that is available for compression and extension.

Straight-wound springs are also easier to understand in terms of their spring rate. Conversely, the only way to actually see how the force of a progressive spring changes is by using a spring tester to map out the spring forces.

Spring preload is one of the most misunderstood concepts when discussing suspension. Often we hear riders talk about adjusting their motorcycle’s spring preload to make the spring stiffer or softer. This is a misconception: changing spring preload does not change the spring rate at all. The spring has the same rate regardless of how the preload adjustment is set. Let’s look at what really happens.

During installation, a spring gets compressed a small amount. This compression is referred to as installed preload. Preload is the distance the spring is compressed compared to its free length when installed. This distance is measured in millimeters or inches. All motorcycles with sprung suspensions have preload. This is true even for the bikes that don’t have preload adjusters. Forks that do have external preload adjustment have spring preload even when set at the minimum adjustment. It is incorrect to assume the fork has no preload if the adjuster is backed out all the way. For example, the preload may range from 20 mm to 35 mm with the adjuster having only 15 mm to travel. It is important to note that all types of forks can have the preload adjusted internally by changing spring spacer length, although sometimes this requires special spacers.

The preload force, which is different from the preload length, is the initial force the spring exerts on the end of the fork tube with the fork fully extended. For a particular spring, increasing the amount of preload (spacer length) will increase the preload force. With a given amount of preload force on the spring, it will take that same force to initiate suspension movement when the suspension is fully extended. As preload is increased, it takes more force to cause the fork or shock to begin to compress. When preload force is decreased, less force is required to cause movement. Keep in mind that when the motorcycle is resting on the ground with the rider on board, the suspension is compressed. When preload is changed the sprung mass is held higher or lower. This means more preload does not require more force to initiate movement after the weight of the bike and rider has compressed the suspension.

Figure 3.8
Use this chart to determine what rate fork springs you should have in your bike for optimum handling. It works with any brand of fork spring. Courtesy of RaceTech.

Too much spring preload results in the suspension being too extended and as a consequence there will not be enough travel available for the suspension to extend into holes. This can cause tires to lose traction as they skip over depressions in the road’s surface. On the other hand, too little preload squanders ground clearance in corners and can cause the suspension to bottom out too easily.

The main thing spring preload adjustments really do is change what percentage of suspension travel is available for absorbing bumps and for extending into holes or dips in the road surface. The goal is to have the suspension in the center of its travel while leaned over in a turn to best be able to manage either bumps or dips. This will allow the suspension the greatest opportunity to keep the tire in contact with the road surface specifically mid-corner. To understand how this affects the suspension’s ability to handle bumps and dips in the road, you must first understand suspension sag. Note also that it affects chassis geometry and handling. See Chapter 16: Chassis Tuning for more details.

There are two types of sag: free sag and static (or race) sag. Free sag is the amount the bike compresses from fully extended under the bike weight only—without the rider on board. This measurement, also known as bike sag, is used primarily during rear shock setup, which is discussed in Chapter 15: Suspension Setup.

Static sag is the amount the bike compresses from fully extended when a rider sits on a motorcycle and the suspension moves downward, or “sags” under the rider’s weight. How much the bike sags depends on the spring rate, the sprung weight of the bike and rider, and the preload. When you tighten the adjusting collar on a shock or increase the preload by tightening the adjusters or changing the spacer length on forks, you are, indeed, increasing the initial force exerted by the springs. This keeps the bike from “sagging” closer to the ground, or decreases the spring sag. It does not, however, increase the spring rate.

Referring to Figure 3.7, the line at the bottom represents a level road surface. Above the surface of the road are potential bumps that will be absorbed by the suspension during compression. Below the road surface are potential dips, or depressions, which the suspension will extend into as the motorcycle moves forward. The illustration shows the effect of a three-step preload adjuster.

Imagine that with only the weight of the bike acting on the suspension (far left of the figure) it is nearly “topped out” meaning 95 percent of the suspension’s travel is available for absorbing bumps. At this point the three-step ramped preload adjuster is set to the middle setting.

When the weight of the rider is added (second from left), the suspension sinks downwards, or sags. Now 75 percent of the suspension travel can absorb bumps, and 25 percent is left to extend into holes. In the next drawing, the preload adjuster has been set to its lowest, or softest, setting. This moves the point of compression and extension downward so that 65 percent of the travel is now available for compression and 35 percent for extension. (It is important to note that the total amount of suspension travel always remains the same at 100 percent.)

In the last of the series of drawings, the preload adjuster has been moved to its highest, or stiffest, setting. The point of compression and extension has been moved up, and now 85 percent of the travel is available to absorb bumps and 15 percent can extend into holes.

The preload should be adjusted to the correct amount of static sag, which is around 30 percent of the suspension’s total wheel travel. For most street bikes this equates to 30 mm to 42 mm of sag. Note that a particular sag number can be achieved with dramatically different spring rate and preload combinations (see Figure 3.6).

The quality of the ride will suffer when a spring is either too soft or too stiff. The spring with a rate that’s too soft will dive and bottom easily because the spring doesn’t provide enough additional force as it gets deeper into the travel. On the other hand, the spring with a very stiff rate will feel harsh, as if it had hit a wall or a stiff spot in its travel.

Larger sport-tourers and dressers can have serious weight differentials based on passengers and luggage. Having the correct spring rate for the load is the single most important aspect of your suspension.

By taking a few measurements, you can see if your spring rates are in the ballpark (Figure 3.8). Most street bikes are set up with fork springs that are too soft for aggressive riding even on the street. Racers generally use higher spring rates with less preload than street riders. However, personal preference, conditions, and type of riding (street or racing) come into play when setting up suspension. Don’t make the mistake of trying to set up your street bike like a racer, or it will try to shake your tooth fillings out on bumpy roads. See Chapter 15: Suspension Setup for more details on how to set sag. When in doubt, consult a good suspension tuner.

The main thing preload adjusters do is change the geometry of the bike when it is being ridden. Let’s say the bike is set up perfectly. If a heavier rider gets on the bike, the preload adjusters can be used to compensate for the increased weight. If the preload is not changed, the bike would sag more—both statically and dynamically—when in use. This would affect ground clearance as well as the rake and trail on the front end and anti-squat on the rear. Preload does affect bottoming resistance, but if you are experiencing bottoming and the sag is in the recommended ballpark, you are going to need a stiffer spring. If the rider weight change is excessive in either direction (lighter or heavier), the spring rate should likewise be changed.

I want to add a couple of final thoughts about air pressure and oil level. On models with air valves built into the fork caps, the addition of air in the forks has a huge effect on both sag and harshness. I don’t recommend the use of air as a tuning variable because harshness generally increases significantly for the relatively small benefit in bottoming resistance. Adding air is almost like adding spring preload instead of spring rate. For example, the use of additional air pressure is tolerable on touring bikes for temporarily changing the load-carrying capacity for riding two-up. It’s not a great solution, but on a bike that is not designed for high-performance riding like a touring bike, it will do the trick. Changes in oil level affect the total spring force, but the effect is negligible in the first half of the travel. The effect is felt in the second half of the stroke as the fork reaches the bottom of the stroke; therefore, it does not affect sag.

Figure 3.9
This shows the relationship between rebound damping and traction, control, and plushness. Note that when traction is falling off as rebound is increased, the feeling of control is still increasing. Most riders will benefit from using less rebound damping than they are used to. Rebound damping is approximately three times stronger than compression damping. This is because it must control the releasing of stored energy of the spring, which unloads all of its energy at once. The ideal range of settings that fall into the “just right” Goldilocks Zone is therefore quite limited, making accurate rebound settings critical for good traction.

Damping Theory

When it comes to overall ride and handling characteristics, many professional tuners consider damping to be the most critical factor. It’s a complex subject, so I’ll start with the basics. Damping is viscous friction. It turns mechanical energy into heat and is sensitive only to velocity, not to suspension stroke position. This is fundamentally different from a spring, which stores energy and is only sensitive to position in the stroke. Damping in modern motorcycle suspension components is accomplished in different ways, but almost always involves a fluid. The configuration can be as simple as shoving oil through a hole, as with old-style damping rod forks, or can be as sophisticated as a multi-stage bending shim-stack configuration in combination with an internally or externally adjustable bleed circuit.

There are two primary types of damping: compression damping and rebound damping. Compression damping, or “bump damping,” occurs when the wheel contacts a bump and compresses the suspension. Rebound, or “tension damping,” occurs when the spring forces the shock or forks to extend, coming back toward the ground. All forms of damping accomplish one thing: they slow down the movement of the suspension. Damping, therefore, changes the kinetic energy of suspension movement and turns it into heat. Because energy can only be changed from one form to another (Newtonian physics), the total amount of energy remains the same.

Figure 3.10
Notice that, as with rebound damping, both traction and control drop off as compression damping is increased. It doesn’t fall off as rapidly as with rebound. Notice also that the peak for control is to the right of traction once again. The range of settings that fall into the “just right” Goldilocks Zone is significantly larger than for rebound damping. This is because we are dealing with a significantly reduced force compared to rebound damping as the springs do most of the work absorbing bump energy.

Suspension Oil

One important factor that affects damping is oil or suspension fluid. For all intents and purposes we can think of oil as being incompressible. When pressure is applied to a chamber filled with oil, the pressure is exerted equally in all directions. If there is an opening for the oil to get out of a chamber, there will be flow and viscous friction (damping or resistance to flow). The degree of damping is determined in large part by the flow rate—more damping means less flow and vice versa.

Oil viscosity is a measure of a fluid’s resistance to flow. It is commonly thought of as equivalent to the fluid’s thickness (sometimes called “weight”). The more viscous the oil, the more resistance there is to flow. Oil viscosity changes with temperature. Oil thins out as it heats up and thickens as it cools. The viscosity index is a number that tells us how stable the viscosity is with temperature: the higher the viscosity index, the more stable it is.

The viscosity index is determined by measuring the viscosity at two temperatures, 210 degrees F and 100 degrees F. The 100 degree reading is where the “W” (or “winter”) designation is measured. (Contrary to popular opinion, “W” doesn’t mean weight.) The viscosity index number is then derived from these two measurements. In engine oil terminology, if the oil falls into the 10W range at the low testing temperature and a 30 range at the high temperature, it is designated as a 10W30 oil and is called “multi-grade.”

As the oil wears out the viscosity index is reduced based on the additives breaking down. In addition, the oils suffer contamination from internal wear (adding things like aluminum oxide) as well as external contamination past the seals. For these reasons the suspension oils must be changed periodically.

Most current sportbikes, and increasingly others, have external adjustments for both compression and rebound damping as well as for spring preload. Most adjustable forks use a screw adjustment located atop the leg for rebound damping. This is not to be confused with the surrounding spring preload adjuster. There is another screw on the bottom near the axle for compression damping. On rear shocks, the adjuster on the reservoir is for compression, and the one on the shaft eyelet is for rebound damping. These adjusters, often referred to as “clickers,” have their limits and typically affect only a small portion of the entire damping range. In other words, even if you have external adjustment capabilities, that doesn’t make up for poor internal valve design. External damping adjustments can never make up for extremely worn out dampers. If your bike is wallowing like a 1963 Cadillac with blown shocks, you might want to do some suspension rebuilding or replacement before you spend the rest of your life playing with the adjusting clickers.

Rebound Damping

Changes in rebound damping affect traction. If you look at Figure 3.9, you’ll see that all of these factors are plotted. There are no numbers on the Y-axis because these are largely subjective quantities. In other words, the discussion is about the ride “feel.” Having said that, these charts are based on years of testing both on- and off-road machines and hold true in theory for virtually every type of vehicle. You will notice that traction starts at very light, or quick, rebound-damping settings, increases to a maximum, and decreases again. Why does this happen? At very light rebound settings, the chassis is uncontrolled. When the wheel hits a bump, the shock is compressed. The shock then rebounds downward without any control. In fact, it extends too far because the sprung weight of the chassis is moving upward. This upward movement of the chassis causes the wheel to be pulled off the ground, thereby losing traction.

Suspension damping clickers are fragile, and should not be forced when counting clicks. Even though the slots are large, they should only be turned by hand with a small screwdriver.

Note that at a high rebound-damping setting, or slow rebound, traction also suffers. The suspension compresses as it hits a bump. As you travel up the bump and reach the top, the suspension attempts to follow the surface of the road back down the other side. The wheel is unable to follow the road surface, simply because it can’t respond fast enough to maintain traction. When this becomes excessive, it is referred to as “packing” because the suspension is packed into a shorter travel area. Maximum traction occurs somewhere between these two rebound-damping extremes.

Your own riding experience may have shown you that when rebound damping is very light, the feeling of control is minimized. The bike feels “loose” and bouncy. As you increase rebound damping, the feeling of control increases as the chassis doesn’t move around nearly as much, and the bike feels more “planted” and stable. When rebound damping is set to higher settings, meaning there’s a lot of damping and the suspension rebounds slowly, traction is poor, and the feeling of control suffers. Once again, somewhere between the two extremes, the feeling of control is maximized.

There is a trade-off between maximum traction and control. Notice that maximum traction does not necessarily occur at the same damping setting that yields a maximum feeling of control. Herein lies a common problem. Quite often riders have mistaken ideas about how much damping should be used. They think the faster they are, or the faster they want to be, the more damping they need. Nothing could be further from the truth. In fact, after reaching a certain level of increased rebound damping, traction, control, and ride quality, or “plushness,” are all sacrificed. Even with rebound-damping settings falling between these two extremes, a trade-off still exists.

I will offer one word of caution. During testing, the only way you will ever know if you have less traction for a specific suspension setting is if you are at the limit of traction. This is a very delicate position for a rider. Without being at this limit, the point at which the tires begin to slide, you can’t feel the difference in traction between one setting and another. As you can imagine, it is very easy to slide too far and crash if you’re not careful when riding on the edge of traction, even for experienced riders. The trick in testing is to be aware of this relationship and plan your evaluation accordingly.

Professional suspension tuners and manufacturers use precise tools to test their components. A shock dyno takes a lot of the guesswork out of performance analysis.

The job of both the suspension engineer and suspension tuner is to make these two peaks, the traction and the feeling of control, as close to the same point as possible. This is done by reshaping the damping curve inside the forks or shock. This requires an understanding of high- and low-speed damping as well as valving piston design. The relationship among damping, spring forces, weight bias, and all the other factors that make a bike handle is also important. Although this complexity may seem overwhelming, making adjustments one at a time or, literally, one click at a time, helps.

Another ride quantity that is affected by rebound damping is plushness. At very light rebound damping, the wheel moves very quickly, and the ride quality is plush or mushy. As rebound damping increases, there is more and more resistance to movement. At maximum damping, the wheel is packing so much that the chassis is sucked down in its travel and cannot recover for the next bump. When you hit the next bump, the suspension has to overcome the added spring force due to this compression, or packing. The result is a jolt to the chassis upon impact.

Compression Damping

Compression damping is one of the most critical, yet easily misunderstood, components of suspension tuning. Understanding how compression damping affects ride quality will go a long way toward demystifying the “black art” of how motorcycle suspension works.

A fundamental difference exists between compression and rebound velocity profiles. Compression velocity is determined by the bump encountered, while rebound velocity is caused primarily by spring force. This means that for proper compression damping, the shape of the bump is far more important than its size. A square-edged bump results in extremely high shaft velocities, while a bump with a gradual slope causes lower velocities. Granted, when you hit a bump at twice the bike speed, the shaft velocity also increases, but the shape of the bump is the critical factor.

In the past, many considered compression damping a necessary evil. They assumed less was better. This stems from the limitations of old-style damping rod forks, or orifice-style damping, which can be simultaneously too harsh and too mushy. This is due in part to how much fluid can be forced through any given sized hole at different velocities. With the advent of cartridge-type forks found on most sportbikes and Cartridge Emulators (Race Tech’s damping control valves for damping rod forks), the ability to control the shape of the damping curve has changed dramatically.

BMW’s US GS Trophy Team member, Bill Dragoo is about to experience first-hand the importance of correct spring rates and compression damping.

To study the effects of altering compression damping settings, it’s important to look at damping as a whole. For now, ignore the shape of the damping curve. The amount of compression damping affects traction, plushness, bottoming resistance, and dynamic dive. Consider bottoming resistance. Referring to Figure 3.10, notice that the more compression damping there is, the more resistance there is to bottoming. It may seem obvious, but you need to have the right amount of compression damping, not too much or too little. The compression damping force is added to the spring forces to help resist bottoming. At the same time that bottoming resistance increases, the feeling of plushness decreases. On the flip side, decreasing the compression damping force will usually increase the feeling of plushness. This is true until you use extremely light compression damping. With very little damping, the plushness can actually decrease. This occurs only on big bumps when the suspension bottoms and therefore feels harsh. On small bumps, less damping still means more plushness.

Let’s examine the effects of low-speed compression damping on traction. Imagine you’re riding along, and you hit a bump. If there is too little compression damping, the suspension will not have enough resistance as it is being compressed. This means that there is still energy that needs to be dissipated at the crest of the bump, and the wheel will continue to move upward as it crests the bump. This is because the wheel itself has mass. As that mass is moving upward, it wants to remain in motion and continues to move upward, compressing the suspension more than the amount required to handle the bump. This will cause the tire to “unweight” and possibly even lose contact with the ground as it crests the bump, causing a loss of traction.

As compression damping is increased, this phenomenon decreases, and traction improves. If excessive compression damping is used, there will be too much resistance to movement, thereby pushing the center of gravity of the motorcycle, or the sprung mass, upward. Not only can this cause an uncomfortable or harsh ride, but this upward velocity of the chassis tends to unweight the wheel as well, resulting in a loss of traction. In extreme cases, the wheel will come entirely off the ground and skip over the bumps. This is one of the reasons why in bumpy turns at extreme lean angles you may experience difficulty holding an inside cornering line. The bike will tend to drift to the outside of the turn because of this loss of traction.

The last factor on the graph represents maximum dynamic dive, or bottoming resistance. This is distinctly different from static sag, which is measured without the bike moving. Maximum dynamic dive is the amount the suspension compresses when hitting bumps or during braking. The maximum amount of dive is determined by a combination of the spring force and the compression-damping force that resists it. If there is no damping of any kind, the front end will dive and begin to oscillate up and down. If you’re braking for a long period of time, friction will eventually stop the oscillation, and you will notice that the fork is compressed, even while still on the brakes. This is called the dynamic ride height. Since damping is nonexistent when there is no suspension movement, the amount the forks are compressed is determined solely by spring forces. However, maximum dynamic dive, or the amount it overshoots the dynamic ride height, is affected by compression damping. Using more compression damping makes the forks compress slower and will tend to hold the chassis up.

If you’re hitting a series of bumps with too much compression damping, the suspension will actually extend, growing taller as the wheels hit successive bumps. This is the opposite of the packing discussed earlier.

There are obvious trade-offs between the two extremes of compression-damping settings. As bottoming resistance increases, plushness and maximum dynamic dive both decrease. At some point between these extremes, traction is maximized. Street bikes fare better because they are biased with less compression damping than road race bikes. Remember, you will pay the price for too much or too little compression damping. The right approach is to determine proper spring rates and use only as much compression damping as you need to control suspension bottoming and front-end dive. You can see a chart of proper spring rates for street bikes in Figure 3.8. Keep in mind that compression damping is dependent on suspension movement. If there is no movement, there is no damping. Also be aware that the shape of the damping curve is critical, reflecting not only how much damping you have, but also how progressive it is. For a detailed look at setting up your particular suspension—including comprehensive troubleshooting and testing procedures, see Chapter 15: Suspension Setup.

Now that you have a solid understanding of traction, steering, and suspension basics, it’s time to understand how your mind impacts your riding and find out what you can do to maximize its efficiency. Soon you’ll be in the perfect mental state to learn advanced techniques faster and more proficiently than you ever thought possible.