[part0011.xhtml] Chapter 5: Concentration
================================================================================
Total Control

## Chapter 5: Concentration

In the quest for maximum bike control, your mental ability to be completely present in the moment is just as important as your actual riding skills. Because the penalties for not paying attention while riding are so severe, the act of motorcycling all but forces you to pay close attention. For this reason, motorcycling has been called “the lazy man’s Zen,” as it can produce the same type of ecological awareness as deep meditation. Fear and distraction are the enemies of presence, and concentration is the cure.

Have you ever noticed how difficult it is to talk to someone in a crowded room? With many people talking at once, it’s difficult to concentrate on what you’re saying. Similarly, when riding motorcycles, there are many distractions that hinder concentration on the road. A motorcyclist’s ability to concentrate is probably his most important tool for staying alive, yet few riders have any training in how to do it effectively. We often use the word, but just what do we mean when we talk about concentration?

Three-time national karate champion and motorcycle racer Ken Merena defines proper concentration as “relaxed attentiveness.” In other words, concentration means being aware of your surroundings without stressing out your body. Because all of us eventually fatigue from any prolonged activity, Merena stresses the importance of getting proper rest before and after long periods of intense concentration for optimum performance.

According to Webster’s dictionary, concentration is “the act of bringing or directing toward a common center or objective: focus.” Using this definition as a starting point, let’s take a look at how concentration works and discuss how you can improve your degree of proficiency.

How It Works

In order to master something, you must first identify what it is. Often this is accomplished by starting with what it is not. One by one, you discount the possibilities until you end up with an idea of what you’re facing. At this point, you can decide where you want to go, and you can focus your attention toward it. This is not unlike eliminating each of the voices in a crowded room until you’re able to carry on a conversation with just one person.

Although everyone’s mind wanders from time to time, the ability to re-center oneself varies greatly from person to person. A master is simply someone who’s highly skilled at this process.

Even a moment’s lapse of concentration can have disastrous results. Pictured is the unconscious author, moments after crashing in his first supermoto race in 2004. It happened after crossing the finish line when he was no longer paying close attention to the rider ahead and was not ready for him to hit the brakes. Seventeen minutes later he regained consciousness and immediately screamed out, “Don’t cut off my leathers!” At that point he realized he was now wearing a neck brace and not much else.

In his book The Use and Abuse of History, Friedrich Nietzsche emphasizes the value of living “unhistorically.” This is the act of being fully present in the moment by temporarily forgetting past events that get in the way of our concentration. He says that the man of action “forgets most things in order to do one. He is unjust to what is behind him, and only recognizes one law—the law of that which is to be.”

Distracted and inattentive motorcycle operation is becoming one of the biggest concerns of the National Traffic Highway Safety Administration (NHTSA). This photo is of the author after 975 miles and 22 straight hours of riding taken by Iron Butt Association President Mike Kneebone. Realizing that he was now a danger to himself and other motorists due to fatigue, Parks took a one-hour “Iron Butt Motel” to get some rest. This left him just refreshed enough to finish up the last 45 miles to the finish line for his first (and last!) Saddlesore 1000.

Neuroscientists believe that the human brain can focus its attention on up to seven things at once before it loses the ability to concentrate. Keith Code, in his groundbreaking book The Twist of the Wrist, describes this process in terms of spending money. Code writes: “Attention, and where you spend it while riding a motorcycle, is a key element in how well you will function. Attention has its limits. Each person has a certain amount of it, and the amount varies from individual to individual. You have a fixed amount of attention just as you have a fixed amount of money. Let’s say you have a $10 bill’s worth of attention. If you spend $5 of it on one aspect of riding, you have only $5 left for all the other aspects. Spend $9 and you only have $1 left, and so on.”

Because reality comes at you from all sides, you must constantly be choosing which things to pay attention to and which ones to ignore. You can do this by tuning in the requisite and tuning out the extraneous. Experience is what helps you decide what things are to be paid attention to as well as which ones should be ignored. This is why beginners shouldn’t try some of the more advanced skills in this book. It’s too risky for them to practice because they don’t have enough experience to recognize the warning signs of a bike that is about to crash.

When it comes right down to it, concentration is the elimination of distractions both outside and inside the body. When there’s nothing left to distract you, you are fully present in the moment. In Zen, this is called mu shin, literally “no mind.” At this point, all things are possible. For motorcyclists, this is the ability to react to circumstances without hesitation. Racers call it being “in the zone.”

Being In the Zone

Before you can get in the zone in any activity, you first must practice your techniques over and over. The skills must become second nature, and you shouldn’t have to think about them. Your actions will seemingly happen automatically, and you can react instantaneously to any situation. Just as you don’t have to think how to breathe or how to beat your own heart or even walk, when riding in the zone, the correct inputs will happen as a matter of natural course. In this state, all your awareness is spent on what to react to, not how to react.

Awareness is the process of information integration; it’s your ability to discern the key elements of information on the fly based on a much larger pool of incoming data. Any given riding situation requires a specific amount of awareness to properly negotiate. Once you hone your skills to a high level, you will notice that it takes less and less attention to accomplish a specific goal. Of course, this can become a dangerous situation. It is tempting to only use the minimum amount of awareness necessary for a given situation so you can use your “excess processing power” on other activities. For instance, you may think about what you want to eat at your next stop while riding your motorcycle. I am a firm believer in awareness overkill. In other words, keep all of your attention on what you’re doing right now. This gives you a reserve of “what if” ability to deal with unexpected occurrences such as another vehicle coming into your lane.

You can tell that you’re in the zone because you won’t have to block thoughts from your mind. Carl Jung wrote, “What you resist persists.” If you stop resisting things like fear and uncertainty, and just allow them to pass through you, they will disappear, and your actions will become pure.

In actual practice, you don’t know you’re in the zone while you’re there. The moment that you consciously contemplate your performance, you have left it. You only recognize it when you leave it, by comparing it to the previous moment’s lack of conscious reflection. This is different from when we are sleeping, because we don’t have awareness of our environment while we sleep. When we’re in the zone, we have total awareness of our environment, but don’t make internal commentary about it.

Everyone has actually experienced being in the zone even if you don’t realize it. To demonstrate this, just think about how long you have been walking. After so many years your legs seem to literally walk themselves, without ever having to think about them. By contrast think about how much concentration is going on when toddlers take their first few steps. It’s notable that we laugh and smile at the first awkward steps of children because it seems strange that they struggle so much with something as simple as walking. As it turns out, however, walking is not easy—it is incredibly difficult. The way that we know the difficulty of any human endeavor is by building a machine to do the same job. Because we have to program every movement, we know exactly what is involved.

In the field of robotics, one of the most difficult things scientists have struggled with is being able to replicate bipedal movement. In other words, getting robots to walk like humans do. That’s because there are approximately 1,000 corrections a second that we make to keep these floppy-meatbag bodies of ours balanced on the two little contact patches of our feet. Intriguingly it was motorcycle manufacturer Honda with its Asimo humanoid robot that first accomplished this technological triumph. The robot weighs 119 lbs. and stands 4 foot 3 inches tall. These specs mean that robotic mechanisms are still not nearly as efficient as human organisms when it comes to replicating muscle energy and computing power for walking.

Improving Concentration

Practice is the secret to improving concentration. But this is a different kind of practice than most people are used to because it involves the doing of a non-action. This practice is best described by a Chinese man reported to be the oldest living person on Earth. When asked what the secret to his longevity was, he responded, “Inner quiet.” Because the single biggest distraction you face is the constant interruptions from your own mind, the practice of inner quiet is crucial for superior concentration. The result is increased awareness and, ultimately, better control.

Honda’s latest Asimo (Advanced Step in Innovative Mobility) robot debuted in 2005 and can walk, run (3.7 mph), and turn. For slalom running at 3.1 mph, the center of gravity is moved toward the direction of the turn before the actual turning takes place—just like Step 2 in the 10 Steps to Proper Cornering (see Chapter 12: Body Positioning).

To achieve inner quiet, what Buddhists call “the still mind,” means to stop consciously thinking about things. But a still mind is not a stupid mind. Rather, it is a mind ready for whatever presents itself. This is not “zoning-out” like we all tend to do from time to time; it is “zoning in.” When you have no thoughts to distract you, the full use of all your skills and abilities becomes available.

Many factors can prevent you from achieving inner quiet. As we learned in the last chapter, fear and uncertainty are two of them. Furthermore, you need to be able to control your mind to prevent it from wandering. As Lao Tzu said in the Tao Te Ching, “Controlling others is strength. Controlling yourself is true power.” To learn how to do anything, it is necessary to begin with the basics. Remember how difficult operating a clutch was when you first began? Now you can do it without thinking about it. Achieving inner quiet is a similar process.

Retrospective analysis of your experience will help hone your concentration when you ride. If you go riding with a buddy, talk about what hazards each of you noticed during the ride when you stop for a break. This is a great opportunity to see what each of you paid attention to, and which things you missed that you want to be on the lookout for the next time.

Meditation Practice

Meditation is probably the best way to practice inner quiet and reduce stress. The primary purpose of meditation is presence: Being completely present in the moment. Whether you’re thinking about something that happened in the past, or worried about something that might happen in the future, both of these conditions take you away from the only thing that can keep you safe. That thing is often referred to as “The Eternal Now,” and the very next instant is a different now.

So what are you trying to think of while meditating? Nothing. Strangely this is one of the most difficult things human beings can do. You’ll be amazed by how much “noise” there is inside your head. Your brain can be bombarded with everything from “Check out that blonde” to “Don’t forget to pick up peanut butter.” Constant thoughts are not unlike the sounds in that crowded room of people. It’s no wonder we get confused and afraid; there’s a party going on up there. One by one, just ask the guests to leave. If you work at it, you can eventually get them all to fade away.

The reason for this phenomenon is the way that we normally go through life is very convoluted as far as thought is concerned. We start with a thought about something. Then there is a pause. Then we have another thought, and another pause, and so on. The goal of meditation practice, and of good riding technique for that matter, is to take that pause in between thoughts, and make it longer, and longer, and longer. When you can spend extended periods of time in that pause; that is what being in the zone really means.

The process can be very therapeutic, especially while riding. By practicing this, your mind will become more still, and your concentration will improve. Even better, try out a floatation tank (see below).

The mind can only handle up to seven issues at one time. Being able to discern what’s important from what isn’t is critical in high performance situations. In the corkscrew at Laguna Seca, riders must deal with directional, speed, and elevation changes, while simultaneously monitoring their bike’s systems and the other riders’ actions. It is as much a mental workout as a physical one.

Warning Signs

Concentration can be affected by many physical conditions. Low blood sugar, not enough rest, and controlled substances all have detrimental effects on your ability to concentrate. It’s also important to do a self-diagnostic test every once in awhile to make sure your stress level isn’t getting out of control. The symptoms are easy to spot as mental stress quickly manifests itself in your body. In Western culture, we brace ourselves for that proverbial gut punch by tightening up our stomachs, shoulders, arms, and hands. Not only does that unnecessarily fatigue our muscles, but it also prevents proper breathing.

Deep, relaxed breaths help bring oxygen to the body. This allows muscles to operate freely and at peak efficiency, which enables you to concentrate on your environment, and not be distracted by your stress. Proper breathing utilizes a “belly breath” not a “chest breath.” Babies do this naturally, but over time they become socialized to hold in stress by taking shorter, more forced breaths. By putting your hand on your belly, you should feel air going in and out without any muscle tension. If your chest is doing most of the moving, it’s time to focus your attention on your breathing until it becomes easy and natural again. Remember, true concentration is trying not to concentrate.

Float Rider

My favorite, and probably the easiest way to practice meditation for better riding, is in a floatation tank. I utilized them for years while racing professionally, and now I even have one at my training center (www.floatvana.com). A floatation tank, also called a sensory deprivation chamber, is at its heart quite simple. It is basically an 8-foot by 4-foot by 4-foot enclosed bathtub filled with 10 inches of water with 750 pounds of Epsom salt dissolved in it. The high salt content creates a super-buoyant environment similar to the Dead Sea, where you become essentially weightless.

The saline solution is heated to 93.5 degrees F, which is your skin’s external temperature. Once you’re settled in with the door closed, your body has virtually no sensory inputs. There is no sensation of temperature, pressure, sight, or sound. It literally seems like you’re floating in limitless space. This allows every muscle in your body to completely relax, and allows your brain to go into a deep meditative state, all without any real effort. The hardest part of meditation is eliminating the external stimuli, and the tank does most of that work for you.

Floatation tanks are great for healing injuries, reducing stress, and improving concentration. Recently I decided to try supermoto racing again for the first time in nine years after suffering a serious concussion (see page 59). I was a little concerned because of my former injury, and decided to help prepare for the race by spending an hour in the tank each of the two days prior to the event. With two heats and two mains, I was pleasantly surprised to win all four races. Even cooler was the fact that several other racers came over afterward and independently commented on how smooth and relaxed I looked on the track. All I could say was, “You should consider floating before your next race.” Of course, floating is just as valuable for street riders as it is for racers, and good for your general health to boot!