[part0012.xhtml] Chapter 6: Right Attitude
================================================================================
Total Control

## Chapter 6: Right Attitude

Before trying out any new riding skills, it’s important to make sure you are in a mental state that is conducive to learning. If you’re like most hard-core motorcycle enthusiasts, no matter how many riding skills books or magazine articles you read—and no matter how hard you practice—you will get frustrated with your progress at some point. The secret to ending this frustration is having the right attitude.

Beginner’s Mind

The most critical component of having the right attitude is maintaining what, in Japan, is called shoshin, which means “beginner’s mind.” This is the attitude of a child during his formative years when the majority of learning in the human brain takes place. Have you ever noticed how quickly children can learn new skills or languages? As an adult, however, it is extremely difficult to learn new languages. Part of the reason for this has to do with how children look at the world. Their eyes are open wide like giant sponges taking everything in with what we might call “the wonder of a child.” This is because humans are very curious creatures and when experiencing anything for the first time we are naturally engaged.

One of the great triumphs and tragedies of our species, however, is our incredible ability for pattern recognition. As we have more experiences with age, we start to notice and recognize more patterns. And pretty soon we start to become mini Nostradamuses and start to predict where the pattern will go next. This ability certainly has survival value. Unfortunately, as we get better at this, we begin to only see the things that fall within the pattern. Many of us struggle with this in our work lives. For example, when a job is new we typically find it interesting and challenging. As we get better and more experienced at it we start identifying and falling into a repetitive pattern. After too many similar experiences we sometimes struggle to find satisfaction with the job because everything about the job fits into the known pattern.

Zen Master Shunryu Suzuki in his book Zen Mind says, “In the beginner’s mind, there are many possibilities; in the expert’s, there are few.” Not surprisingly, the hallmark of the beginner’s mind is humility. Being humble is the key to learning because it is the ego that keeps our minds closed to new ideas. The more you think you know about riding, the less you will be open to new techniques. Therefore, the best policy for learning new things is to always keep a beginner’s mind. This beginner’s mind is not only the attitude that will allow you to get the most benefit from taking a class or formal training; it’s the attitude that will allow you to learn more in any situation. Specifically, any time we get on the motorcycle is an opportunity to learn more.

A beginner’s mind can also be described as living in possibility, as opposed to expectation. There is actually only one thing that has been proven to be the cause of all unhappiness in the world—unfulfilled expectations. In other words, you expected things to be one way and they turned out to be another. Take any life experience you’ve had where you’ve been unhappy, and you will see that an unfulfilled expectation is the cause. In fact, according to the Eurobarometer Survey, for the past 30 years Denmark has been the happiest country in the world. Danes appear to know instinctively that expectations kill happiness, so they keep their expectations low and are therefore often pleasantly surprised by life.

You’ll know that you have the wrong attitude on the motorcycle if you become upset, pissed off, or demoralized. Any time you find yourself in this position it is due to your unfulfilled expectations. The key is to not have already made up your mind about what should be happening and just enjoy whatever is happening in the moment.

Reality has a way of shaping itself to your preconceived expectations, so don’t limit your learning by deciding you already know how to do something. My favorite example of living in possibility is demonstrated by the television character McGuyver. The reason his character is so compelling is because he refuses to let what he already knows get in the way of seeing new possibilities. Rather than accepting popular belief, he looks at everything with the wonder of a child. The cool thing about him is that his solutions to problems were always something any of us could have physically done. The difference is that we would never have thought of it. I’m not suggesting that you figure out how to make your motorcycle into a bomb. I am inviting you to look at your riding from a fresh new perspective, uncluttered from past ideas about how things need to be done. On a bike, this philosophy could be used to see a rainy day as a fun opportunity to practice learning about the traction limits of a motorcycle, rather than a ruined riding day.

It’s clear from watching the top racers’ vast differences in riding styles that there are many approaches that can be effective. Sometimes a racer will even need to change his style from one track to the next. The racers who can keep a beginner’s mind and adapt their style to current conditions are the ones who are the most successful. The danger, however, is that the more you apply this practice, the more your mind will tend to anticipate what will happen next. This will make it easier for you to either get bored or compensate for the boredom by pushing too hard. In finding a comfortable learning pace, you will enjoy your relationship with the road and keep motivated.

Motivation

The second component of right attitude is motivation. You need to be motivated to try something new. For example, if you’re in a bad mood, it is difficult to learn new skills, as your mind is preoccupied with unrelated thoughts that keep it from being clear. The clearer your mind is, the easier it is to understand new information. And the easier it is, the faster you will learn. If you work on your skills by yourself, it is easy to become frustrated, but the frustration itself can be encouraging. It is your mind’s way of signaling that you have lost the right attitude, and that it is time to re-center yourself.

Practicing with a riding buddy is one of the best ways I know to keep motivated. Not only can he see what you are doing and provide valuable feedback, but he can also encourage you when you start to get tired or lazy. This is critical if you are to remain focused on the task at hand. If your mind starts wandering, not only are you not learning, but you are also increasing the likelihood of making a costly mistake that could lead to an accident.

Having the wrong attitude can lead to bad choices. Bad choices can include treating public roads like a racetrack. Treating public roads like a racetrack can lead to uncomfortable bracelets. Don’t end up with uncomfortable bracelets. Practice Total Control techniques and achieve the right attitude.

Road Relationship

The third component of right attitude is your “road relationship.” As motorcyclists, we like to spend a lot of time on the open road, but few of us ever really consider our relationship to it. Whether you ride fast or slow, you have an unwritten agreement with the road beneath you.

Like family or business relationships, your road relationship can take three basic forms: indifferent, adversarial, or complementary. An indifferent relationship is like the one you have with the cashier at a fast-food joint. You neither like nor dislike the cashier—you just deal with the person to reach the objective, which is ordering a hamburger or paying for fries. Most riders have an indifferent road relationship. They think of it as little as possible and don’t really relate to the road except when there is a perceived danger, in which case they approach it with caution and distrust. This is a normal survival response, but it can also get you into trouble if you don’t learn to manage it.

Another popular road relationship is of the adversarial variety. This is usually seen in sport and dual-sport riders. It is fueled by the notion that they’re going to beat the road into submission. The road becomes their enemy, and they set out to do battle with it. A famous riding instructor advises: “You don’t beat your competitors. You beat the track better than they did.” The problem with this attitude is that, just as it is difficult to communicate with someone who disagrees with you, it is difficult to be sensitive to small changes in pavement when you don’t like the road.

The most beneficial type of road relationship is a complementary one. In this kind of relationship, you work with the road instead of against it. Dealing with your fear and maximizing your concentration are both skills needed to achieve the right attitude. They are necessary to learn skills and improve your riding. Unfortunately, many skilled riders lack a positive road relationship. Although you don’t get to pick your family members, you do get to decide what kind of relationship you’re going to have with them. Similarly, you get to decide what kind of relationship you’re going to have with the road.

Legendary motocross champion Bob Hannah is a great example of someone who knows how to relate to the road. Hannah used to like to race in the rain. This is not because he particularly enjoyed getting dirty, but because he knew that everyone else hated it. He realized that if he could approach it with the right attitude, he’d have a big advantage over his competition. With seven national championships under his belt, it’s difficult to argue with his logic.

So, how do you create a positive road relationship? Perhaps the best way is by using visualization techniques to get you in the right state of mind. Before I ride, I like to think about positive past experiences, times when I had a great ride and everything just seemed to click. I close my eyes and remember what the road and scenery looked like, how the air smelled, and what sounds I heard. I completely immerse myself in the memory until I feel like I’m actually there. There are physiological changes that take place during this inner journey that put my mind at ease, and my body automatically relaxes. This is effective because when it comes to learning, the human mind doesn’t differentiate between real or imagined experiences.

Olympic athletes and professional racers alike use visualization training to help learn new skills and develop consistency. When it comes to learning, the human mind doesn’t differentiate between real and imagined experiences. When it comes to physical pain, however, the human body definitely does!

Once I have conjured up the memory in my mind, I say some of my favorite affirmations aloud. I speak, not just think, phrases like “the bike and I are one,” and “fear is the mind killer.” I realize this sounds corny, but it’s an incredibly effective process for re-centering yourself in the here and now, which naturally gives you a positive road relationship. For example, when I say, “The bike and I are one,” I imagine such a close connection to the bike that I don’t know where it ends and I begin.

A positive road relationship also includes knowing how to deal with traffic. In Southern California, where motorcycles can legally ride between the cars in slow traffic, it is imperative that motorcyclists have the right attitude. When I moved to California in 1992, I remember being terrified of “lane splitting.” I thought of cars as enemies and had several close calls that left me feeling pretty scared. But, in time, I began to change my attitude toward the traffic, and I started thinking of it as more of a dodging game. Now I rarely have close calls, and when I do, I don’t freak out and panic. I just simply do whatever’s necessary to avoid an accident. This makes me a much safer rider, since a moment’s lapse of concentration anywhere can be fatal.

Enjoyment

The last factor in creating the right attitude is the ability to enjoy what you are doing. You have to enjoy the process of practicing riding skills. For those of you, who, like me, possess the competitive spirit, you can bring it into your training. Just remember not to take competition too seriously, or you will eventually lose your motivation toward practice. It’s fine to compete with other riders or even the stopwatch, but do it in the spirit of a game. For example, if I told you to run 10 feet forward, stop, run 15 feet to the left, 12 feet to the right, then 18 feet back again, you would think it was a boring exercise. But if I put a tennis racquet in your hand and was hitting balls at you, the same activity would be a lot of fun.

Overconfidence can turn into recklessness on the street or the track. Even when you (or another rider) make a mistake, the right attitude can transform it into a learning experience.

Another aspect of the game spirit is the element of chance. If you knew you were going to win the game before you played, it wouldn’t be much fun, and you wouldn’t learn a whole lot. Having an element of unpredictability makes any event infinitely more interesting. That’s the power of gaming. Think of ways you can make motorcycling into a game by creating exercises that utilize speed, time, and position goals.

If you’re learning with a buddy, don’t let yourself get so caught up in competing with him that you forget why you are there. Because people learn at different paces, it’s important to not push people faster than they can learn. Discuss your goals beforehand and make sure you are both clear about what you are doing as well as why you are doing it.

The best attitude for learning riding—or life—skills I ever heard came from Herb Cohen, author of You Can Negotiate Anything. In the book he said, “I care, but not that much.” To adapt this to motorcycling, care enough about your riding practice to put out your best effort. But don’t care so much that if you are unsuccessful at making your desired progress, it will be a problem for you. In other words, don’t be so attached to the expectation of doing it correctly, that if you do it incorrectly, it ends up upsetting or demoralizing you. It’s in the making of mistakes that allows you to learn.

The reason for this is that success and failure are really one in the same when it comes to learning. If you do something correctly, great! But if you do something incorrectly, you’ve actually just been successful at learning one more way how not to do something. Of course, the only way to know that something is correct is—by contrast—knowing what incorrect looks like. This is why in this book we show you both correct and incorrect examples of techniques so you benefit from the comparison.

When you have the right attitude, you become naturally easygoing, and you’re able to enjoy both your successes and failures. Either way, you are learning something new. Both success and failure are important for keeping your attitude from becoming overconfident and reckless, or underconfident and hesitant.

From Zero to Hero

The book’s “cover boy” is Marine Cpl. Scott Fond-Leoncini who epitomizes a positive attitude transformation. Here is his story in his own words.

I started riding a month or so after my 19th birthday. Getting back from my first tour in Iraq I purchased a Honda CBR600F4. I went through the MSF Basic RiderCourse out in town and got my license. Soon thereafter I went on my first ride on Angeles Crest Highway and crashed twice that day, not really understanding why. After getting back from my 2nd tour I was “voluntold” to take the MSF’s Military Sportbike RiderCourse (MSRC) on my new Kawasaki 636. After the MSRC I went to Palomar Mountain and totaled my Kawasaki and almost flew off a cliff and died! After that I got my Triumph Daytona 675 and went through Keith Code’s California Superbike School. I learned a lot there but still had a ways to go. I actually crashed on the road course and later was kicked off the track because I “wasn’t getting it.”

Before

After being berated for “stupid behavior” by one of the base safety managers I took the Total Control Advanced Riding Clinic Level 1 and 2 and it completely changed me as a rider. Even some civilian friends of mine on Harleys noticed how much my skills changed and they signed up “for whatever he got.” I went back to the track on base and was tearing it up—dragging knee in every corner and seemingly flying thru the course. It’s enlightening to look at pictures of my riding style before and after.

After

The skills I learned in Total Control have literally saved my life and let me have way more fun. For example, if I had not learned how to stop as quickly as possible by using max braking, I would be dead right now. As a vehicle pulled out of a parking lot onto a main street, I broke as hard as my traction would allow. I still hit the car, but going from 40 mph to around 15 mph in a very short amount of time is what saved my life. I understand there is no way to completely eliminate the risks of riding. But in a worst-case situation like I was in, having the right skills greatly minimized the damage. I came out of this accident with a scraped knee and bruised calf. That’s it.

—Scott Fond-Leoncini