[part0006.xhtml] Introduction
================================================================================
Total Control

## Introduction

The speed and capabilities of modern motorcycles now far exceed the average rider’s abilities. In fact, the difference between stock street bikes and full-blown racing superbikes is a tiny fraction of that between sports cars and their racing counterparts. This has created a need for more and better rider education.

The Problem of Learning to Go Fast

Having spent many years in riding and racing schools, I am a big supporter of rider training. The knowledge I have gleaned from these classes has literally saved my life numerous times. For sport riders who want to improve their technique (especially high-speed cornering), there are two basic options: the Motorcycle Safety Foundation Advanced RiderCourse (MSF ARC) and the various track schools. Unfortunately, while both are worthwhile, each has drawbacks that limit how much a rider can improve by participating.

The problem with the MSF ARC is that all the drills are at such low speeds that the fear of going fast is never handled, and the advanced skills used by racers to control their bikes at high speeds are not taught. Track schools, on the other hand, have the opposite problem. The speeds are so much higher than most street riders are used to that many are afraid to try new techniques for fear of a high-speed crash. This is a real shame as most track schools have solid skills to teach, but the racetrack environment is not ideal for the average street rider to learn the basics of high-performance riding. Once a rider has the basics down, however, there is nothing better than a good track school to refine and expand on those skills.

The author started racing professionally in 1994 where he finished second overall in the AMA Superbike Championship in the 125 GP class (now called Moto 3). It was during this time that he began his intellectual journey into figuring out the physical, mental, and mechanical dynamics of riding faster and safer.

As part of my duties as editor of Motorcycle Consumer News from 1995–2000, I had the privilege of working with both David Hough and Keith Code on many riding skill articles. They really sparked my interest in the subject. Even though I finished second overall in the AMA 125 GP national championship in 1994, I realized while working on these articles that although I was fast, I still had much to learn about how to control a motorcycle. I became concerned because I mostly learned how to race by “feel” and wasn’t entirely sure exactly what I was doing. This made my riding inconsistent. When I had problems on a particular track, I didn’t know how to diagnose them, let alone fix them. Long conversations with Hough and Code finally got me thinking about the physical dynamics of riding, and I began a quest to figure out an easy way to fix my riding when necessary.

A New Way to Learn

As it turns out, many of our readers were also looking for a similar “easy” way to improve their riding. I kept getting complaints from street riders that there was too big a gap between the MSF and the track schools. Some wished for a “middle step,” and others had no interest in ever going on a track—despite my encouragement—and just wanted something a little “stronger” than the MSF’s offerings. To make things worse, many also complained that the only books on the subject were written for racers and were too complicated for them. They wanted simpler solutions for high-performance street riding, not sophisticated racing strategies.

After listening to enough of these “middle-stepper” complaints, I eventually decided to do something about it and began work on a new genre of riding school. It would combine the advanced techniques of the track schools, with the lower-stress parking lot environment of the MSF curricula. Just as importantly, each skill would be broken down to its simplest form and practiced individually in a building block format.

Using many friends as guinea pigs, the curriculum and drills began to take shape. My basic teaching philosophy was simple. Rather than ask a rider to try something at, say, 20 mph faster than he ever has tried such an exercise before (which happens at some track schools), I would ask the student to try going faster in small, 2-mph increments. This prevented him from getting too scared.

Getting coaching from our professional instructors is the most effective way to put Total Control techniques into practice. Use this book as the gateway to taking your riding to another level.

For example, let’s say that a full race pace around a 40-foot diameter circle is around 34 mph. A typical street rider might be comfortable going around it at 17 mph. The important thing here is to keep the student comfortable so he will be willing to try something new. First, I teach the proper technique at 0 mph. To do this I have the student get on his bike and along with several other students to help me, we go through a mock turn by leaning the bike all the way over and back up while I help properly position the rider’s body in real time using what we call the “10 Steps to Proper Cornering.” We do this several times until the student can do everything right in the mock turn. Then he goes on the range and does it. After going 17 mph, he moves to 19, then to 21. Let’s say he has a problem at 21 mph, I work with him on the problem until he can go 21 mph without a hitch. Then we move to 23, etc. Now he will likely not get over 30 mph on street tires, but by the end of the day, using this teaching technique, each area of his riding will have made specific measurable improvements. My Advanced Riding Clinic (ARC) was born.

Over 10,000 students later, this method has more than proven its mettle. In fact, while the curriculum was originally designed for street riders, many racers have found it equally effective at improving their riding skills.

I originally stumbled across this method while figuring out how to teach myself to drag my knee back in college. Next to my dorm was a big empty parking lot that was mostly used during sporting events. One day when there were no such events planned, I had the parking lot all to myself. I set up a practice turn with the use of several strategically placed dirty sweatshirts. The important thing here is that I did not set up a “course” with multiple turn and braking points. I felt it best to keep it simple. With my turn in place, I took a few deep breaths, strapped on my helmet, leathers, boots, and gloves, and set off to explore uncharted lean angles.

After about five minutes of warming my tires by weaving back and forth like I’d seen racers do on TV, I began slowly increasing my speed. I found that I had to keep changing my body position to deal with the increased velocities, and just kept playing around until it felt comfortable for me. Of course, I had no idea what I was doing, and had no knowledgeable instructors to help guide me, but after about 30 minutes of this, I finally touched my knee to the ground and felt like I had achieved a great milestone in my life.

Rather than risk ruining the moment, I picked up my clothing, parked the bike, and walked back to my dorm room, a new man. Every rider who has ever dragged his knee remembers his first time like it was yesterday. Part of the reason for this is that it often requires years of practice to work up to it. However, in one half-hour on a sunny Saturday afternoon, I was able to break the threshold, within a low-stress environment, and so can you. Fortunately for you, everything I was missing that day is clearly spelled out for you in this book.

The Book Is Born

After teaching many ARCs at rallies around the country, two things were clear: My students were making incredible improvements in their riding, and I could never teach enough classes to make much of an impact in the general motorcycling population. It was for the second reason that I never sought any publicity for my Clinics. I knew I didn’t have time to fulfill the demand even if I wanted to.

The Internet threw a monkey wrench into the mix, however, as happy graduates were posting their incredible stories of improvement on websites all over the place. One of the people who happened to notice many of these postings was Motorbooks International Acquisitions Editor Darwin Holmstrom, who asked about the possibility of doing a book on the subject. Although I had considered doing a book at some point, his call brought the project to the front burner. After much thought, I realized that doing a book was the only way to get this riding technology to the masses, and so I began putting words to paper.

After finishing the initial research, I decided to thoroughly test each and every technique by returning to national road racing after a seven-year absence. I chose to compete in the WERA National Endurance Series because the large amounts of track time would give me the most opportunities to validate my findings. I joined the Speed Werks/Cyberlogtech team racing a Suzuki SV650 in the Lightweight class. My two teammates had just earned their expert licenses after just one season of racing as novices. Although I didn’t think we would be contenders for the crown, I figured it was an ideal opportunity to test the techniques with several riders.

Amazingly enough, even with a rookie crew with no endurance racing experience, we managed to win the championship in our first effort as a team. Obviously, the technology was ready for publication. On a very somber note, our team owner Scott Gowland was killed two weeks before we won the championship he worked so hard to achieve. It is to his memory that this book is dedicated.

What It Is

The purpose of this book is to teach you how to have total control of your bike. So, what does total control mean? The best definition I’ve heard was told to me by California Superbike School Chief Instructor Cobie Fair: “Putting the bike where you want, when you want it.” How you use that control will vary from rider to rider. You can use it to go faster with the same level of safety you currently have, or ride safer at the same speed, or some of both. This book deals specifically with riding technique, not racing strategy. That subject will be covered in another book.

This book gives you a real tool for making improvements in your riding. In doing so, it empowers you to self-diagnose problems when they occur, as well as giving you the solutions. In other words, you will learn specific riding techniques that will put you in control of your motorcycle. This is fundamentally different from giving you generic advice like “be smooth.” I think Keith Code said it best when he called smoothness the “false promise” because, in and of itself, it doesn’t tell you how to achieve this state. My position is that smoothness is not something that you do. Smoothness is the result of having practiced the correct techniques enough times that each time it takes less and less effort, until pretty soon you can do it with virtually no effort at all. But, to simply tell someone to be smooth is as useless as telling him to be fast. Without knowing exactly how to do it, it’s just an empty concept.

I should mention that throughout the text I use the pronoun “he” as a generic for describing riders and “she” for passengers. This is not meant to be sexist in any way. Unfortunately, in the English language we have to choose, and using the “he or she”—or even worse, the singular “they”—options are awkward to read and grammatically incorrect, respectively. So, feel free to substitute he for she and vice versa whenever appropriate.

How to Use It

This book is divided into six sections, which are meant to be read in order—no post-modernist non-linearity here. Part 1 covers the physical dynamics of your bike’s chassis. I have gone to great lengths to explain the physics involved without requiring any mathematics. Without this understanding, the techniques will not make as much sense, so I encourage you to not skip over it.

Part 2 deals with the psychology of riding. Getting a handle on how your mind relates and reacts to the realities of high-performance motorcycling is just as important as the techniques themselves. By learning to handle fear and control your mind, it will be easier to learn the techniques faster.

In Part 3 you will learn the specific techniques for controlling your motorcycle in a clear and concise format that uses pictures to show not only what to do, but also what it looks like when you do it incorrectly. In teaching the Total Control ARCs, I’ve found that demonstrating both the correct and incorrect way makes the techniques much clearer to the students.

When it comes time to practice the techniques, you can do them on the road, track, or in a parking lot. It’s important to make sure the surface is free of dirt and dust, and dry. Also make sure that if there are painted lines, that they are not slippery. You can use either a big broom to sweep it or, my preference, a gas-powered leaf blower. Also, it’s critical that your tires are up to operating temperature, so I suggest a few minutes of weaving back and forth to scrub some heat into the tires before attempting any of the techniques. Trust me, this is well worth the time.

I highly recommend bringing one or more riding buddies along to practice these drills. Ideally, each will have read the book beforehand, but if not, you can point out in the pictures what they should look for, both positive and negative. This is helpful because riders may think they are doing something correctly when they are not. I also highly recommend using a camcorder and/or smartphone to record as much of your practice as possible. As we jokingly like to say in Total Control, “while the instructors may lie, the camera never does.”

Part 4 deals with setting up your bike for high-performance riding. Each of the chapters has useful information, but Chapter 15: Suspension Setup is the most important and should be considered a prerequisite before practicing any of the techniques.

After retiring from professional road racing at the end of 2001, the author made a one-time appearance in the Triumph Thruxton Cup Challenge national series at Willow Springs Raceway in 2005. Using the techniques in this book, he won the race on a virtually stock motorcycle, beating many notable regulars including three-time Grand National Champion Jay “Springer” Springsteen.

Part 5 is about preparing the rider for all this fun. While the best way to stay in one piece is to never get into an accident, wearing the right gear and being physically fit are also parts of a comprehensive safe-riding strategy.

Additional resources can be found in the appendix here, and online. This includes my recommendations on other riding schools.

Right Attitude

Although the information in this book is the result of exhaustive clinical testing, there will always be alternative techniques that also work. For example, multi-time world champions Mick Doohan and Carl Fogarty were much faster racers than I will ever be. Having said that, I would never try to teach anyone their unique riding styles as they have too many drawbacks compared to what’s contained herein. I do believe that by trying each of the techniques in this book, you will find most—if not all—of them to be a great help in improving your riding.

I request that you “try on” the techniques in this book in the same way you might try on a jacket at a store. Remember, just because you try it on, doesn’t mean you have to buy it. But the more jackets you try on, the better your chances of finding the one that fits just right. With this attitude you will do well, and don’t worry about remembering everything. Remember what you can and it will be enough to work on. When you are ready for more, you can revisit the text. You can’t make a wholesale change in every area of your technique in one sitting, so don’t try.

Use this book as you would a cookbook. Take it out whenever you forget a specific recipe for good technique. And feel free to mark it up with any personal notes that you find helpful. Like any good cookbook, the more helpful it is, the more it will look like a well-used tool. Of course, there’s nothing wrong with having a pristine extra copy on your coffee table for visiting riding buddies.

Finally, before you begin your journey to total control, don’t forget to enjoy the process. My personal mantra is “Better living through motorcycling,” or as Robert Pirsig put it in Zen and the Art of Motorcycle Maintenance, “The real cycle you’re working on is a cycle called yourself.” By working on your riding skills, not only will you become safer and have more fun, but you will express your true nature through your unique interpretation of the techniques. This is similar to the way a skilled dancer adapts the basic dancing moves to her body’s unique structure, effectively putting her “signature” on the movement. When you are fully self-expressed, you become naturally happy and content, so practice these techniques and you will literally improve your life.