[part0027.xhtml] Epilogue
================================================================================
Total Control

## Epilogue: On the Path to Mastery

In this book we have spent considerable time going over the specific distinctions of riding a motorcycle. You’ve learned the 10 Steps to Proper Cornering, how to position your body, how to choose lines, etc. This technology for riding is quite sophisticated at first glance. But the best riders don’t think about all of those specific things. The best riders transcend those distinctions and are able to ride with very little conscious thought. To illustrate this, think about a really good horseback rider. You notice that it becomes difficult to differentiate where the rider ends and the horse begins. They work so well together it is almost like they are one thing. The image I like best is that of the mythical creature, the centaur—which is part man, part horse. Suzuki used to have an advertising slogan that summed it up nicely, “Works like a single moving part.” This is our ultimate goal in motorcycling. We become one with our motorcycle where we cease to be a person riding a motorcycle and we simply become the action of riding.

To understand how we accomplish this, let’s do a mind experiment. Let’s imagine that there is a place called the Island of Brilliant Riding. In this magical place, you ride brilliantly every day. Every rider would desire to visit such a place. Now, of course, to get to the island we need a boat to navigate across the body of water. Let’s call this boat the USS Total Control. And while we are on this journey we will learn the Total Control riding technology. Once we reach the shore we have to get off the boat, and herein lies the problem.

Many people don’t want to get off of the boat. That boat is very comfortable and feels very secure. So what do they do? They strap the boat onto their backs and wonder why they can’t ride very well. You can often see this with some motorcycle instructors who have been teaching the MSF curriculum for too long. You can almost hear them saying their mantra in their helmets: “Slow, Look, Press, Roll” as they robotically go through each step just so. Their problem is they don’t have the depth of understanding of riding techniques to string the motions together in one fluid movement.

Every rider benefits from an experienced mentor.

This is the reason for the famous Zen kōan about the tenth century monk named Budai, or “laughing Buddha.” You’ve probably seen the small statues of this guy at Chinese gift shops. He is depicted as an obese, bald man wearing a robe and carrying all his possessions over his shoulder in a cloth sack. Even though he is obviously poor, his smiling face lets you know he is content. One day when a monk asked him what is the meaning of Zen, he simply dropped his bag and didn’t say a word. In other words, what’s keeping you from “being in the zone” as we like to say, is that bag of crap you carry with you everywhere. It includes all your bad habits, your misunderstandings, your past experiences, etc.

In a special sense, the reason you are reading this is because your riding is a little bit “sick.” When you are sick, the doctor prescribes medicine. The problem is we get addicted to the medicine. But medicine is not food for a motorcyclist. Brilliant riding is food. The purpose of medicine is so that you don’t need the medicine. The purpose of a teacher is so that you don’t need a teacher. The purpose of method is so you ultimately don’t need a method. In Japan, if you have spent too much time with a particular master you are said to “stink” of Zen. You can think of Total Control as the medicine you need to overcome your sickness.

The whole idea about these techniques is not that you want to be thinking about them all the time when you are riding. Thinking too much causes you to always be half a step behind what you are trying to do. It should be the opposite. You should use the Total Control technology until you’ve trained your muscle memory to use it without conscious thought. This is a classic double-bind.

Total Control is here to help you get better, but to take that final step, I can’t help you. You and you alone must take that final step. I can only point you in the right direction. The Buddhist metaphor of a finger pointing at the moon is perhaps the most apropos here. So if I want you to show you the moon, I will point my finger toward it. But as long as you see my finger, you can’t quite see the moon. It is rather blurry. When you finally refocus and see the moon, however, my finger disappears! How strange is it that this critical tool that is absolutely necessary to point you in the right direction must literally disappear for you to get the final result.

In the Tao Te Ching it states that “In the pursuit of knowledge, every day something is picked up. But in the pursuit of wisdom, every day something is let go.” So in conclusion, you need a teacher so you can one day leave the teacher. But to do so you must get off the boat, drop your bag of past crap, disregard the finger, and forget the teaching.

In order to do these things you have to get beyond your ego—beyond your idea of yourself as a separate identity doing some kind of independent action. You also must eliminate the distinction between “man” and “nature.” There is no such thing as man on the one hand and nature on the other. Man and nature are interdependent. You can’t have one without the other, like two sides of the same coin. For those of you with pets, you know that because you feed them, dogs think that you are the king. On the other hand, because you feed them, cats know that they are the king. So from the cat’s perspective, there is “cat” and there is “nature,” with “man” being just a part of nature. When you get rid of the artificial separation, some amazing things become possible.

A great illustration of this is from the book of Zen and the Art of Archery, written by Eugen Herrigel in the 1940s. Eugen was the first, if you’ll excuse the expression, “round-eye” (non-Asian) to be accepted by a Japanese Zen master for archery training.

The book details his account about the six years that he spent studying under this master. Believe it or not, the entire six years was spent trying to do one thing and one thing only: learning how to “loose” the strings of the Japanese long bow. No matter how boring any job you’ve ever had could have seemed at the time, nothing you’ve experienced could probably compare to the monotony of just releasing the string of a bow for six long years. At a certain point in the book, Eugen gets really frustrated with his master who keeps scolding him for not doing it properly. The master keeps telling him to stop trying so hard and just let “it” shoot the target. Eugen is understandably confused and finally blurts out that if what the master said was true, then he ought to be able to hit the target blindfolded. In the now famous “shot in the dark” story, Eugen’s master fires two arrows into a dark target room. After turning on the lights Eugen discovers that “the first arrow was lodged full in the middle of the black, while the second arrow had splintered the butt of the first and ploughed through the shaft before embedding itself beside it.”

The rest of the short book is spent with Eugen occasionally getting it right and allowing “it” to shoot, without letting his conscious thought control the shots.

Total Control Training, Inc., actually facilitates a lot of motorcycle safety programs for the United States Marine Corps. In the marines there are three levels of rifle shooters: Marksman, Sharpshooter, and Expert. Interestingly when you ask Expert shooters, many of them will tell you that the best shots happen almost like a surprise. In other words, they don’t remember consciously pulling the trigger—“It” shot. In the same way, my goal for you is to experience “It” rides.

How long does that ultimately take? In Malcolm Gladwell’s best-selling book Outliers, his research pointed out that 10,000 hours is approximately how much practice it takes to master something. From the Beatles in music, to Bill Gates and Steve Jobs in software, to various child prodigies, they all had right around 10,000 hours of practice when the opportunity to utilize that skill in a profound way presented itself. I should note that by “practice,” I mean rigorous, methodical, goal-oriented practice, not just seat time. There are many riders who claim to have, say, 20 or more years of riding practice. What many actually have, however, is one year of practice repeated 20 times, which is not the same thing. The idea of proper practice can perhaps best be summed up by understanding the difference between amateur and professional riders. Amateurs practice until they get it right. Professionals practice until they can’t get it wrong. Use what you have learned here to become a professional-level rider, even if your only riding desire is to have a safe, fun way to get to work.