[part0025.xhtml] Section 5: Rider Setup
================================================================================
Total Control

## Chapter 19: Fitness

Having raced motorcycles since I was 14 years old, the riding benefits of physical fitness have always seemed obvious. But most street riders, and even many club racers, don’t take fitness seriously and have no idea how much it can improve their riding.

When you are physically fit, you can ride longer and farther without fatigue. You can respond more effectively to dangers on the road. Plus, you can ride more safely and increase the amount of enjoyment you get out of riding. What motorcyclist would not sacrifice a little sweat in exchange for these benefits?

If you’ve never raced, you’d probably be surprised by the strength and endurance needed to wrestle modern road and off-road bikes around racetracks. In fact, motorcycle racers are among the fittest athletes in any sport. Because racing is just riding at a higher level, what’s good in terms of fitness for the racer is, therefore, good for the street rider.

Riders vs. Racers

One of the toughest physical impacts motorcycle racers, especially those who race off-road, have to contend with is “arm pump.” This is an incredibly painful buildup of lactic acid that saps forearm strength, wrist control, and grip strength. To help avoid arm pump, cardiovascular and weight workouts are used to complement a rigorous schedule of practice racing. Fortunately, most pleasure riders need only pursue a minimum regimen of general conditioning to see significant benefits on the road.

10 Minutes to Moto-Fitness

Being inherently lazy when it comes to working out, I asked distinguished personal strength trainer and Total Control Instructor Timothy Parravano (austinstrengthtrainer.com) to come up with a special workout routine. It had to be no longer than 10 minutes and optimized for executing our techniques.

What he came up with is a motorcycle-specific, total body exercise routine based on years of research and training into high-intensity interval-training program (HIIT) protocols.

The exercises are designed to get maximum results in minimum time. They are designed to be done statically, therefore they are very safe. The exercises stabilize your core muscle group, which will give you more balance and stability. Your core muscles are defined as your entire abdominal wall, chest, shoulders, lats, mid-back muscles, low back muscles and down into your hips.

Motorcycle racers are among the fittest of athletes due to the need for a combination of both fast-twitch (strength) and slow-twitch (endurance) muscle fibers. Wrestling a 250-hp rocketship in 100-plus-degree weather wearing a thick leather suit requires tremendous physical and mental stamina.

Since running is not always an option, getting your heart rate up to a point that will impart the benefit—the point in which the body actually adapts—is the goal here. The harder and more intensely you work your muscles in a very brief amount of time (roughly 6 or 10 minutes), the more likely you will achieve a higher level of respiratory and cardiovascular stimulation. The goal in these workouts is to get your heart within 70 percent to 90 percent of its maximum heart rate (MHR). To find your approximate maximum heart rate, take the number 220 and subtract your age. Then, multiply that result by 0.8 to get the target heart rate. For example, if you are 20 years old you would start with 220, subtract 20 to get 200. Then multiply by 0.8 for a result of 160. The goal is to get the heart rate up by using your muscles in a brief, intense fashion. Do not let the heavy breathing during your workout slow you down. Embrace it! When your heart rate is in that 75 percent to 90 percent zone the metabolic process switches from an aerobic workout to an anaerobic workout. This is exactly what we are after. Studies published in the Journal of Applied Physiology show that subjects who performed high-intensity, brief four or seven 30-second bursts three times a week for two weeks found that their endurance capacity increased by nearly 100%. This was accomplished in only 6 to 10 1/2 minutes a day! The point of all this is that more is not always better. This workout is brief, intense and safe. These exercises will allow you to spend more time on the bike having fun as opposed to dreading working out.

Follow Timothy’s Six or Ten Minute Workout exactly as prescribed. There are Four Exercises that make up the Six or Ten Minute workout. Basically it becomes a 10 minute workout if you decide to repeat the cycle. It can be performed essentially anywhere with minimal equipment. These are body weight exercises. A $20 chin up bar from your local big-box sporting goods store is the only (well worth it) investment you will need.

The exercises are the Wall Squat (2 minutes), Plank (2 minutes), Straight-Arm Plank (1 minute), and the Chin-Up (1 minute). The workout is done with no or minimum rest between the exercises. Because we are after results, this no-resting stuff is non-negotiable. There are only 5 to 15 seconds to get into position for the next exercise. Remember, we want that heart rate to stay elevated.

Now I fully realize that we are all at different fitness levels. We all have different physical limitations and abilities. Start slow and do what you can. This workout may not be for everyone but if you’re able, give it a try. Many of you may struggle to make the six minutes. Remember this workout is designed to work up to six minutes. Do not be discouraged if you cannot complete it right away. Just keep at it. Like the Total Control exercises, these are hard. I have never met anyone that does not have 12 to 30 minutes per week to make a profound change in fitness level. You simply have to want to do it. I have thrown in some variables on these exercises to make them more challenging when you can reach the standard 6 or 10 minutes.

Tips for all Workouts

• Consult your physician before starting any new program

• A light stretch or quick warm-up before is recommended

• Breathing is very important. Keep plenty of air circulating though your lungs

• Do not carry excess tension in the body

• The clock runs the entire time—even during “breaks”

• It’s best to workout with someone else for 1) Safety, 2) Plank placement and replacement, and 3) Motivation

• Do them in numerical order

Equipment Needed

• Wall (found in virtually all structures)

• Plank (any material)

• Chin-up/pull-up bar (home-made or store-bought)

• Pen and paper (to record your times)

• Stopwatch (app on most smart phones)

• Chin-up bands for assistance (optional)

Exercise 1—Wall Squat

Duration: 2 minutes

The first exercise is what I call the Wall Squat. Use a wall or a tree and basically pretend you are sitting down in a chair that does not exist. If you need to rest, use your heels and slide (push) your rear end up and take a “minimal break.” Remember, the clock does not stop once the exercise starts, so if you need to rest, do it quickly.

Advanced tip: Place a medicine ball, soccer ball, or yoga block in between the knees and squeeze. This activates your adductor muscles even more, strengthening your legs to squeeze the tank for hard braking, cornering, etc.

Correct

Figure 19.1

Incorrect

Figure 19.2

Exercise 2—Plank

Duration: 2 minutes

Without hardly taking any steps, (try to not even move your toes) get down on the floor within seconds for the Plank. Use a 1 x 4 piece of wood, a yardstick, or anything that will mimic a plank will do. One must be used as this is the only reliable way to ensure perfect form. If you are having a hard time holding the plank for two minutes, take a quick break or two (or three). The clock keeps running during these exercises so although you are allowed to break, make it fast. Put the knees down for 5 to 8 seconds and get right back into it. Your heart rate must stay elevated!

Correct

Figure 19.3

Incorrect

Figure 19.4

Exercise 3—Straight-Arm Plank

Duration: 1 minute

Immediately, and without moving your body, only your hands, assume the position of a straight arm push-up. Do not do more than one push-up during this minute.

Hold the position statically without moving for the entire minute. While holding static you will automatically keep your arms locked or a slight bend in the elbow. Try to keep a slight bend in the elbow. If there is any gap on the plank during the exercise and you cannot correct it, you’ve lost form and you are done. Move to the next exercise.

Advanced tip: Slowly lower yourself into an actual push-up. The goal is not to see how many you can do but to see how slowly you can move for the entire minute.

Correct

Figure 19.5

Incorrect

Figure 19.6

Exercise 4—Chin-Up

Duration: 1 minute

This exercise, without a doubt is the most difficult. This exercise is performed last and should not be overlooked. The previous three exercises are stepping stones for this one and this is where you put it all together. There are numerous ways to do this but we will focus on a couple of them. The one you choose will be determined by your fitness level. Remember, the clock does not stop so this is a continuous, fluid activity. This is basically either a static hold or a negative repetition, eccentric lengthening of the muscles. Start with a step stool or sturdy chair. Climb up and assume an underhand grip about shoulder width apart. Bring one knee up for stability and balance, tighten abdominal muscles, raise the other knee and carefully step off the chair/stool. The goal is to get to a point where you can hold yourself up for as long as possible up to a minute. If you can start by climbing up and lowering in 10 seconds, you are making huge progress. As your arms slowly straighten out to where your arms are almost extended, this is where we get the most out of the repetition. The lower you go, the slower you go. Every time your arms fully extend, you are done with that particular rep. Step down, climb up and repeat, for up to one minute.

At this point, you have a choice: Either you are done for the day or you wait up to 90 seconds and repeat the cycle. As a recap, the Wall Squat was 2 minutes; the Plank was 2 minutes; the Straight-Arm Plank was 1 minute, and the Chin-Up was 1 minute. This is the Six Minute Workout. You can be done and come back in three days and do it again. Or wait for the 90 seconds (or 60 or 30 seconds) and repeat the cycle, only this time the times are cut in half. The Wall Squat is now 1 minute. The Plank is now 1 minute. The Straight-Arm Plank is now 30 seconds and the Chin-Up is also now 30 seconds. This becomes the Ten Minute Workout, breaks included. How cool is that?

Beginner

Figure 19.7

Advanced

Figure 19.8

So do you think you have time to try the workout? I’ll bet you can find 6 to 10 minutes a week. Remember when it comes to this particular workout more is not better. Three times a week maximum is how often you should do this. One time is totally cool, too. You decide. The general rule of thumb is this: Say you work out on a Saturday and you are sore through Monday. It’s usually the second day after a workout that you feel it the most. This is called Delayed Onset Muscle Soreness (DOMS). Wait one more day until the soreness is gone (after Tuesday) and, in this case, it is safe to work out on Wednesday.

Doing this workout, or strength training in general, will add stability and balance to your body and when done properly, activities like yoga, swimming, and cycling are great ways to prepare for motorcycling. Those activities will become easier because you will be stronger. Whatever physical activity you choose to do, make it fun and challenging. Life is good when you are physically strong.

Remember, if you have any specific physical or health problems, you should see a physician and a physical therapist before starting any weight training. A physical therapist can often analyze problems and design workouts that avoid making them worse.

Eyesight

Good eyesight is also vital for street riders. I had been riding in road and motocross races for years before I had my eyes checked. After straining to read the scoreboard at a basketball game, I finally realized my vision might need some improvement and went in for an eye exam. After being fitted with glasses for the first time in my life, I was shocked to see how much I had been missing. My very next race I dropped 1.5 seconds a lap. For the first time in many years, I could actually see where I was going! This not only made me faster, I felt considerably safer and more confident as well. If you suspect your vision may be less than 20/20, get a checkup.

Multi-time 250GP national champion Rich Oliver trains his eyesight for better vision as well as hand-eye coordination. He also underwent corrective surgery to help optimize his situational awareness.

It may be the best single improvement you can make to your riding.

Multi-time 250GP champion Oliver suspects that a lot of motorcyclists on the street cannot see well enough to be safe and effective riders. Oliver himself has had corrective surgery to make sure his vision is optimal for competition. “The better your vision is,” he says, “the quicker your response to situations.” Remember that your eyes don’t always work at optimum levels. If you are tired, they can’t focus as well, and this can hurt your ability to control the bike.

The conditions of your eyeglasses and your windshield are just as important as your eyesight. If they are dirty or scratched, your vision will be hampered in the same way your reflexes are impaired by alcohol. You should clean optical surfaces with a good microfiber cloth that won’t scratch them. If they are already scratched, replace them.

Peripheral vision is also very important. And as a way to train this faculty, Oliver visits the batting cage regularly to develop and maintain quickness of focus, quick reactions, and hand-eye coordination. But, he says, motorcyclists can use other sports, like tennis, which also requires good hand-eye coordination, to get their vision and reflexes in shape. Professional athletes will even employ experts on sports vision who can offer training tips for improving their vision.

Diet

The final part of the fitness equation is diet. You don’t have to be fanatical about it, just use common sense and moderation. You want to eat to ride, not ride to eat. Of course, there’s nothing wrong with riding to a restaurant to have a sensible meal. Regardless of where you eat, you should remember that reducing the total quantity of food will help keep you from cramping and putting on extra weight. If you feel overstuffed and bloated after a meal, you ate too much.

When reducing quantities, it’s important that you not cut out too much protein because it is what helps keep your muscles strong and working properly. Cutting down on excess carbohydrates, like those found in sugars, breads, and pastas, is a good way to save some calories. Remember, the carbohydrates your body doesn’t burn eventually get stored as fat.

Preventing Overheating and Dehydration

Keeping cool and hydrated on a motorcycle should be a concern for every motorcyclist, especially when riding hard. Unfortunately, there is a lot of misinformation on the subject, and the strategies for keeping you comfortable will vary depending on climate.

While competing in a six-hour endurance race at Summit Point in 2001, I began to suffer from heat exhaustion, which I was lucky enough to diagnose before it turned into heat stroke. Fortunately, the night before the race I was watching a story on the evening news about a football player who had just died on the field from heat stroke. I had paid enough attention to remember some of the symptoms, which include headache, dizziness, nausea, and tiredness. I had experienced all of them while on the track. As soon as I started feeling incoherent, which is the signal of the onset of heat stroke, I came in immediately.

Frankly, I was shocked by how fast my condition deteriorated. Within only six laps, the 90 percent humidity of West Virginia had done me in. In fact, I had to be carried to our air-conditioned RV where I spent the next four hours curled up in the fetal position. My teammates were smart enough to keep me drinking water. I drank over a gallon before I even had to urinate—that’s how dehydrated I was. The scary part is that I thought I had been drinking plenty of fluids throughout the day. Obviously it wasn’t enough. The need for hydration in endurance racing is so important that many racers who take part in the Suzuka 8-hour event actually get hooked up to an intravenous drip between stints! Intravenous drips being impractical for high-performance street riding, so you might want to consider using a backpack-style beverage container such as the ones produced by Camelbak. Fortunately motorcycle gear manufacturers recognize the need for hydration and many include water bladders as an option for many riding jackets and even tank bags. Whichever your solution, it’s important to understand heat exhaustion and dehydration in case you or a riding buddy ever show any symptoms.

Evaporative Cooling

Perspiration is the way your body transfers excess heat to the air. This process is called evaporative cooling. Those of us who live in dry climates are fortunate because we can use this process to keep cool in the hottest of temperatures. I once stayed comfortable while riding through the California desert in 130-degree-Fahrenheit temperatures by keeping my long-sleeve cotton shirt drenched in water, zipping an Aerostich jacket over it, and leaving the jacket vents barely open. As long as I kept moving, the little bit of incoming airflow was able to evaporate the water, reducing temperatures by 30 degrees or more! The best evaporative cooling gear I’ve tried is from LD Comfort (ldcomfort.com), which keeps your skin dry on the inside even though the fabric is wet on the outside.

Another consideration when dealing with hot moving air is your body’s skin temperature of 93.5 degrees Fahrenheit. Once the ambient temperature rises above this, exposing yourself to the air will heat you up, not cool you down. This is the reason firefighters wear those thick jackets. They need to insulate themselves from the heat of the fire. If ventilation was the answer, they would all be wearing mesh jackets. Ventilation does work well from approximately 78-90 degrees Fahrenheit, but can be counterproductive outside of that range. Because your body uses its water supply to keep itself cool by perspiring, you need to keep it replenished with water or sport drinks.

Sport Drinks

Most of the sport drinks on the market are loaded with huge amounts of sugar and salt. If you really like drinks like Gatorade, it’s a good idea to mix them with water, adding one part water for each part sport drink. I prefer nutrient-enhanced water like Glaceau’s Smartwater, which contains no sugar. If you’re really serious and don’t mind spending a little cash, motocross trainer Gary Semics is partial to energy drinks from Cytomax because they’re loaded with vitamins and minerals designed to go through the stomach and into your system quickly.

Putting It All Together

Now your mission is clear. By getting yourself in good shape, working on your vision and reactions, eating right, and watching your hydration levels, you can experience longer, safer, and more enjoyable rides for a moderate expenditure of time and effort. A happy by-product is that you will probably live a longer and healthier life because your heart will be less likely to give out early. You will also be better able to avoid the accidents that those riders impaired by fatigue, slow reflexes, and sub-par vision may not.

Don’t forget to incorporate exercise into your routine. If you’re the type of person who enjoys a health club atmosphere, you’re already halfway there. If you’re like me, however, and find going to health clubs about as much fun as digging ditches, I have another suggestion. Finding a good workout partner can mean the difference between really doing it and blowing it off. As the proud owner of two pit bulls, I have been pleasantly surprised to see that both are always up for a walk, run, or any other kind of adventure any time of day or night. They keep me motivated and make exercise fun. Perhaps that’s what unconditional love really means.