[part0010.xhtml] Section 2: Mental Dynamics
================================================================================
Total Control

## Chapter 4: Fear

Fear makes progress impossible

—FDR

Fear is the single biggest hindrance that we motorcyclists face when trying to improve our skills, yet few riders ever seriously inquire into it. To make matters worse, it is seldom written about in motorcycle magazines or books, and rarely dealt with in the popular riding schools. If there is one thing that I’ve learned in the 15 years I’ve been conducting my Total Control Advanced Riding Clinics, it’s “Remove the fear and the barriers to learning disappear.” After all, anyone can follow step-by-step directions. It’s fear that keeps riders from following through on their desires to make a change in their riding.

Dr. Susan Jeffers, author of Feel the Fear and Do It Anyway, points out that the one fundamental fear underlying all others is a belief that “I can’t handle it.” If you’re afraid that you can’t handle the consequences of a crash, like scratching up your expensive motorcycle or getting hurt, your body’s survival mechanisms will make you incapable of pushing through the barrier. Although your conscious mind may want to turn the throttle a little more, your unconscious mind will not allow your wrist to comply. This is a frustrating situation for anyone serious about improving their skills, but unaware what is stopping them from making progress.

Acknowledging your fears by putting them into positive, verbal language can eliminate the negative influence they have on your riding. In other words, once you speak—not just think—the words, “I can handle it if my bike goes down,” or whatever it is that you are afraid of, the fear no longer has control over your behavior. At this point you can concentrate on the task at hand without having your subconscious cause you to hesitate or wallow in your actions.

It should be noted that fear is actually a good thing, but we must learn to work with it, rather than struggle against it, to make it a positive influence on our riding. Obviously, fear is necessary for survival. If we weren’t afraid of anything (like falling down) we would soon die by doing stupidly dangerous stuff. For instance, if I tried to run the same lap times as Valentino Rossi, I would eventually crash, as I do not possess the necessary riding ability nor the physical strength or reflexes.

Additionally fear can increase your adrenaline flow, which provides added strength in emergencies. We’ve all heard the story of the old lady who lifted a car off her trapped son even though she technically didn’t have the strength to do it. But fear can also be your worst enemy if you don’t learn to control it. Too much of it can have a crippling effect on even the most experienced riders.

Fear Threshold

Every motorcyclist has what I refer to as a “fear threshold.” That is, a point at which the level of fear becomes so great that his mind cannot process any additional information. This is not unlike trying to run a math-intensive software program on an old computer. It can only make so many calculations per second. If you try throwing too much information at it too quickly, it’s liable to crash. In the same way, if you try pushing a motorcycle faster than your brain can disseminate the sensory inputs, you also may crash.

Figure 4.1
Fear is a necessary evil for self-preservation, but experienced riders are able to keep it in check by building their confidence level. A paradigm shift is a change from one way of thinking to another. It’s a transformation driven by agents of change. To progress from a mental state of fear to confidence, the agents of change are knowledge and faith.

As an example, while riding motocross at a friend’s practice track many years ago, I came face to face with this reality. In fact, I overshot my fear threshold by such a margin that my mind hit its own reset button so I didn’t have to watch.

My buddy Dave was one of those lucky kids whose dad let him build his own motocross track on the family farm. One day while racing around on my RM80, I came around a turn a little too fast to hit the next jump on my undersprung bike, so I decided to take a detour around the jump. Unfortunately, I learned too late that my planned escape route had a 4-foot-deep ditch in the middle of it. As it turned out, rather than getting loads of dirt delivered to build the track, Dave decided to just dig next to where he wanted a jump to get the raw material. As soon as I realized what was about to happen, I actually fainted while riding the bike. My mind literally shut down to avoid being conscious for the ensuing carnage. Apparently, it knew the next two seconds were going to be big-time trouble, so it went into “sleep” mode, ostensibly to save me from consciously experiencing the horror.

Figure 4.2

When I awoke, I was upside down in the ditch with a pretty good headache and the bike lying on top of me. I had absolutely no recollection of the crash, and, in retrospect, I think that’s a good thing.

Often, right before a rider crashes, he says to himself, “Oh shit, I think I’m gonna crash!” Sure enough, that’s exactly what happens. While many crashes are physically preventable right up until the last moment, once a rider decides he’s going to crash, it becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy and all other possibilities disappear. To understand this a little better, let’s take a look at how the brain handles fear.

If you think back to biology class, you’ll remember that the brain is divided up into different parts (Figure 4.2). In the case of motorcycle riding we’re primarily concerned with two parts: The first is the most primitive part of the brain, called the brain stem, or reptile brain. If you ask biologists they will tell you that the reptile brain is responsible for what they call the Four Fs of survival. They are Feeding, Fleeing, Fighting and, of course, Reproduction.

Few things strike fear into the hearts of professional racers like the threat of an oily track. Here a giant turbine blows the oil dry off Daytona International Speedway as part of a crash cleanup. Every racer will have to decide how much faith he has in the condition of the track, as well as his tires, when the green flag drops again. Those who have faith, tempered with the knowledge of previous similar experiences, hold a serious advantage.

The most advanced part of the human brain is the frontal lobes. The frontal lobes are responsible for higher-level thinking activities such as imagination, creativity, logic, planning, and intuition. The important thing to remember about how your brain works is that whenever you are utilizing the frontal lobes, you stay out of the reptile brain, which is where fear resides. In other words it is impossible to be afraid when utilizing the frontal lobes. That is why good riding instructors give you one specific thing to work on during each exercise so you can focus on that and not on your fears. If you begin to feel fear while riding, you have retreated back to the reptile brain and need to move your thinking back to the frontal lobes.

One of the keys to staying centered in the frontal lobes is confidence. Confidence is derived from two factors: knowledge and faith. Knowledge is the culmination of all the facts, information, and skills derived from the analysis of physical and mental experiences. In the trades this is sometimes referred to as know-how.

By faith, I don’t mean in the Biblical sense of pretending to know things you don’t know. Rather, as Alan Watts so eloquently put it, faith is “trusting yourself to an inherently untrustworthy world.” In other words, even though you can’t control every variable affecting you, and you might even be severely injured or killed by something you can’t control, you feel that the risks are manageable. So while terrible consequences are possible, with proper skills and experience they are not probable. This is perhaps best elucidated by navy admiral and computer pioneer Grace Murray Hopper who once said, “A ship in port is safe, but that’s not what ships are built for.” Or as we like to say in Total Control, “If you think you can or you think you can’t, you’re right!”

A perfect example of this phenomenon is when four-time AMA Formula One Champion Mike Baldwin predicted that Wayne Rainey would be a big success even before Rainey left for Europe where he went on to win three world championships. Why? “I could never make myself completely trust the front tire,” Baldwin said. “But Wayne had the ability, when the race started, to just decide to trust it, and ride as though it would grip every time.” This kind of trust comes from confidence. Put simply, Rainey had total faith that the front tire would stick.

It’s important to note here that you ride differently when you think you will have traction versus if you think the bike will slide out. As an example, notice how relaxed, confident and focused your body is on a perfect, sunny day with a great view of the open road. Now let’s say in that relaxed, confident state of being that the rear tire slides a little bit. Is that a big deal? No, not at all. You simply go with the flow and keep right on truckin’ along. By contrast, consider how tense and nervous (perhaps paranoid) you become on a wet, slippery road going around a blind corner in the dark. Now in that state what happens when the rear tire starts to slide a little? You make a bad situation worse by overcorrecting as your adrenalin-filled muscles try to over-control the bike, possibly resulting in a crash.

In a special sense while riding in poor conditions it’s best to become an “actor” and pretend that the conditions are good. This does not mean that you should accelerate hard in the middle of a slippery corner. It does mean that you should be just as relaxed, present, and focused as if you had really good traction, so that if the bike starts to slide, you will be in the perfect mental and physical state to deal with any changes in traction. The bottom line here is that you have to accept whatever is happening. After all, whether you like your traction conditions or not, your particular situation is what you have to deal with. The sooner you accept your reality, the faster you will be able to react to and work with it.

Probably the best examples of this kind of acting are improv artists. If you’ve ever wondered how stand-up comics on stage or in TV shows like Whose Line is it Anyway? are able to make up such funny skits and even songs on the fly, today is your lucky day. It’s because they have a secret that they never share with the audience: They accept everything 100 percent at face value. In other words, they never “block” anything. No matter how outrageous the other comics are on stage, or how nasty of a heckler is in the audience, improv artists act like that was exactly what they expected and perform accordingly.

As motorcyclists we can use this same technique to help us deal with unexpected threats on the road. Imagine a semi truck crossing over the double yellow line into your lane. Normally most riders would go into full panic mode and might even target fixate on the truck, causing a head-on crash. But what would the improv artist do? Rather than freezing up on the terrifying thought that the truck is on a collision course for him, he’d simply change his line as soon as his original one was no longer available without skipping a beat. Interestingly that’s the same way a good salesperson “turns on a dime” and changes his pitch as soon as he realizes his original strategy is not on track toward a sale.

Working with particle accelerators, quantum mechanical physicists have discovered that it is impossible to observe sub-atomic phenomena without actually changing what happens. Amazing as it sounds; you cannot watch something, including yourself and your environment, without creating a new reality. This is why every major sport psychologist emphasizes visualization techniques. By imagining a particular event, you actually create the possibility of its existence.

Improv artists never let anything faze them. Using their secret of “accepting everything at face value” can help keep riders safe on the road when the unexpected happens.

No Problem

In the Tao Te Ching, Lao Tzu says, “He who is not afraid will always be safe.” There are many interpretations of this. However, when it comes to motorcycling, I have found one to be of profound significance. It can be explained by inquiring into what happens when your bike begins to slide.

Most motorcyclists have at one time or another slid one or both wheels in a corner—usually under power while exiting a turn, often in the rain. When this happens, what’s your reaction? A superior rider will simply let the slide occur as if it was supposed to happen. If you are able to retain your composure, the bike will usually correct itself as if nothing ever happened. That’s the purpose of trail in a chassis. It makes the bike want to straighten up whenever it’s crooked.

The problem most of us face, however, is that whenever we think that what is happening should not be happening, we perceive this as a problem and get scared. Once you get scared, your body gets tense and your mind goes on overload. In this situation you are like a beginning rider and unable to process all the inputs. You have lost your connection with the outer environment and become focused on your inner fear. At this point your chances of crashing have increased significantly. To avoid this scenario requires some special practice.

Factors That Contribute to the Ability to Handle a Threat

If there is one organization that needs to know how to deal with fear it’s the United States Marine Corps. Below is an adaptation from the Combat and Operational Stress Control publication USMC MCRP 6-11C.

Anything that empowers motorcyclists in those initial seconds after encountering life-threats to say to themselves, “Yes, I can handle this,” will make them not only more effective at riding but also more resilient to the potentially damaging effects of life-threatening stressors. Strengthening both the body and mind are necessary to be optimally effective.

Strengthening the Body

Body factors necessary for effective coping and resilience include the requisite physical skills, strength, endurance, and other attributes needed to mount an effective response and to counter a particular threat. Physical wellness and fitness are critical for an optimal response to a threat. Conversely, the lack of physical wellness or fitness may significantly detract from a rider’s ability and confidence. A further biological prerequisite for a positive threat response is the effective and normal functioning of the brain feedback circuits necessary for reducing the internal threat alarm as needed to keep negative emotions, involuntary reflexes, and body-brain activation under control. These brain systems are part of the essential infrastructure for positive coping, but they are also vulnerable to being reduced in effectiveness or even damaged by intense, long-lasting stress.

Strengthening the Mind

Strengthening the mind for mounting an effective coping response and maintaining resilience begins with a familiarity with the specific threat situation encountered and the ability to recognize it as familiar. Familiarity may be the result of previous realistic training or similar operational experience. Unfamiliar situations may also be mastered by a rider who is able to generalize prior training or experience by adapting what was learned in the past to somewhat different situations in the present. The mental ability to generalize knowledge and skills and to adapt them to new situations requires intelligence, creativity, and self-confidence—all traits to be strengthened in riders to promote effective functioning and resilience. The final contributors to mental strength—willpower and fortitude—are two aspects of courage. Fortitude is the ability to encounter danger or bear pain or adversity without faltering; whereas, willpower is the motivation to convert that mental strength into courageous behavior. These two crucial components of confidently handling a situation are also two of the least permanent or stable attributes. Knowledge and skill, once acquired, are not quickly lost, but willpower, fortitude, and courage are eroded by the wear and tear of continuous exposure to hardship and danger, and may evaporate during an unexpected event. Willpower and fortitude are among the most important attributes of professional riders and racers.

In a perceived emergency your body is programmed to “go with what you know.” If you’ve not practiced riding with a little bit of fear, you will likely panic when subjected to an unexpected event.

Only by practicing sliding will you become comfortable enough with it that you will not be pushed beyond your fear threshold when it occurs. Because sliding on the street (especially on a large touring bike) can be very dangerous, your best bet is to practice it on an off-road or dual-sport bike. The lighter weight of the bike and the slicker surface of the dirt will teach you the dynamics of sliding in a much safer environment. (See the appendix for a listing of the best off-road schools to learn the art of sliding.)

While riding in the dirt, you begin to learn that it’s OK when your bike slides and you can just let it happen without fighting it. After all, once you’re sliding, there’s nothing else for you to do except let it happen since the more you fight the slide, the worse it will become. Then when a slide occurs on the street, you will be able to deal with it without overdosing on fear.

Another name for overdosing on fear is panicking. In a panic situation you are not able to properly reason, which was probably best illustrated by Homer Simpson from the animated TV show The Simpsons. In one particular episode, Homer, the father, admittedly not the sharpest tool in the shed, comes home one day and he is in a real conundrum. His daughter Lisa, the good kid, has very uncharacteristically gotten into trouble in school. Well, Lisa never gets into trouble at school so he doesn’t have a pattern of behavior to fall back on to know how to deal with the situation. After thinking about it for a moment he comes up with the solution and orders Bart to vacuum the floor. When Bart understandably protests, he quips back, “Boy, in times of trouble, you go with what you know!”

Similarly, in times of trouble on the motorcycle, we go with what we know. And what we know is what we’ve made habit. And what we’ve made habit is what we’ve practiced over and over. So, if you want to make the skills you learn here into habits, you will have to practice them over and over again until you’ve trained them into your muscle memory. That way, you’ll be able to execute them even in a panic situation when you can’t think about them first.

Action Muscle

Another important skill to develop in the war on fear is what Tony Robins calls “exercising your action muscle.” That is, the mental gumption to go into physical action in the face of fear. For example, I have been a singer my entire life, yet I still get stage fright almost every time I get up to perform. While racing in a 1994 WERA national road race at Road Atlanta, I was asked to sing the National Anthem in front of 24,000 people. Even though I had sung that song hundreds of times before in front of much smaller crowds, the large venue had me so nervous my shaking hands could barely hold the microphone still. Although almost paralyzed with fear, I was able to close my eyes, take a deep breath, and get up and do it anyway. The reason I could do it was all my previous practice. Not just my singing practice, mind you, but my performing while nervous practice … my exercising-the-action-muscle practice. In his best-selling book Outliers, author Malcolm Gladwell identifies 10,000 hours as the necessary amount of practice to achieve mastery of a physical or mental activity.

Over a period of years I had conditioned myself to not consider nervousness as a problem. Rather, I looked at my fear as a signal that it was time to perform. I was actually thankful that it pumped up my adrenaline level so I could really belt out the tunes. Had I not practiced performing with fear so many times before in front of smaller crowds, I never would have been able to muster the strength to handle all that nervousness. That is why I cannot emphasize enough the importance of practicing riding with a little bit of fear to get comfortable being a little uncomfortable. That way, when the unexpected takes you by surprise, you’ll be able to handle that feeling without shutting down.

Bravery

Contrary to popular opinion, I believe everyone has a similar fear threshold, that everyone can only take so much fear before they can no longer consciously think and act. Brave people aren’t those who can overcome larger amounts of fear, they are those who raise the point at which fear gets control of their minds. For example, Valentino Rossi couldn’t ride any faster than you if he experienced the same fears as you while riding your pace. The difference in his ability simply means that the speeds at which he experiences those fears are much higher than yours or mine. Once he reaches that threshold, he can’t break through it anymore than we can break through ours—until we change our thinking. As soon as your mind reaches this “information overload” point, you’ll need to re-center yourself as quickly as possible. Hopefully, you’ll be able to accomplish this before you lose control. We’ll discuss how to do this in the next chapter, Concentration.