[part0017.xhtml] Chapter 11: Braking
================================================================================
Total Control

## Chapter 11: Braking

Braking is one of the most misunderstood riding techniques, and there are lots of conflicting data on the subject. Part of what makes braking misunderstood are the differences between automotive and motorcycle brakes. In contrast to cars, motorcycles have separate front and rear brake controls, which require the rider to have specialized skills. Motorcycles also typically have a greater percentage of weight transfer during braking than four-wheeled vehicles. As we apply the brakes and the weight transfers forward, the front tire pushes harder into the road surface, which increases the size of the contact patch and means more traction on the front tire. Similarly as the weight transfers forward the rear tire gets lighter and lighter meaning less and less traction is available from that end. With cruisers this typically means that we can get about 70 percent of our braking power out of the front brake and 30 percent from the rear. On a sportbike this weight transfer can be much more extreme with the front brake providing approximately 90 percent of the braking power leaving on 10 percent for the rear.

You could say that “braking experts” come in two basic camps. On the one hand, there are physicists who like to base their theories on mathematical formulas, exploring what is possible. On the other, there are the “experientialists” whose theories are based on many miles of real-world testing. I fall into the latter category so I will keep the physics to a minimum and concentrate on what has proven to work in the field.

It should also be noted that my techniques and theories are based on extensive testing. This includes training over 10,000 students in advanced braking techniques. It also comprises thousands of scientifically controlled and measured braking runs over a five-year period, from 1995 to 2000, as the editor and test rider for Motorcycle Consumer News. During that time, I brake-tested virtually every new bike. Based on the distances achieved when compared to those of other motorcycle publications doing similar work (many of which still stand in 2014), I would even go so far as to say that I am probably the foremost lay expert in the art in terms of minimum distance and consistency. By testing every bike on the same stretch of asphalt in similar conditions, certain truths emerged. Before we get to them, however, we must first look at stopping from an energy perspective.

Few things scare riders like hard braking in the wet. In racing circles rain is known as the “great equalizer,” as horsepower and braking power must be used judiciously. While rain tires help provide traction, even MotoGP champions like Valentino Rossi can’t break the laws of physics.

Energy

First let’s look at the energy conversion that occurs during braking. The bike and rider have forward kinetic energy as they travel down the road. When we apply the brakes, whether it is for adjusting our speed, a normal stop, or a quick stop to avoid a hazard, the brake system on the bike takes the forward kinetic energy and converts it into heat energy. There can be so much heat that in car racing at night you may even notice the rotors start to glow bright red! Many modern bikes feature brake rotors that have holes drilled in them or a wave pattern on the outside edge. One of the reasons that rotors are made this way is to help them dissipate some of that heat into the atmosphere.

Additionally some of that forward kinetic energy can be converted into potential energy through a stoppie if the rear wheel lifts and comes off the ground. In fact, during maximum braking, a 1- to 2-foot-high stoppie at the end of a stop can reduce the total braking distance by up to two feet. Unfortunately a fast and high stoppie results in too much rotational inertia, which can cause an endo crash (flipping over forward).

What Contributes to Quick Stops

Different types of bikes present unique opportunities and liabilities when stopping, though all have to follow the basic laws of physics. The following is a list of braking “truths” as I have come to know them.

One of the most debated topics in rider training is whether you should use two or four fingers during braking. The correct answer is whichever way you’re more comfortable—but know the tradeoffs. Most modern sportbikes can stand up on the front wheel with only two fingers. Many cruisers and tourers with inefficient brakes require a lot of pressure on the front lever to do an adequate amount of braking. The more fingers on the brakes, the less steering and throttle control is available. The fewer fingers on the brakes, the less power is available at the lever.

1) The longer the wheelbase, the shorter the braking distance. In a quick stop, the forward inertia combined with weight transferring to the front makes the bike want to flip over its front wheel. A longer wheelbase makes the bike a longer lever to resist that force. This is the same reason it is easier to swing a short hammer over your head than a longer one of the same weight.

2) The lower the center of gravity, or CG, the shorter the braking distance. Like a longer wheelbase, a lower CG makes it more difficult to flip over. For the same reason, wrestlers try to stay as low as possible to keep their opponents from flipping them over. If you scoot your body back against the seat of a sportbike, your upper body will naturally get closer to the ground, lowering the combined rider and bike CG. The bike’s total weight is much less important than where on the bike that weight is located. On a touring bike or cruiser, in addition to lowering your riding position while braking, the distribution of your luggage mass can also have a measurable effect on stopping distances. Always store the heavy stuff as low on the bike as possible for quicker stops.

3) The stickier the tires, the shorter the braking distance. Traction is what enables a motorcycle’s brake system to transform forward momentum into heat. Because of this, racing tires are designed to work best at very high temperatures. That is also what makes them poor choices for street riding as they actually have less traction at lower temperatures than street compound tires. This is not nearly as important with sportbikes as it is with cruisers and tourers. For instance, virtually any modern street tire will allow a sportbike to reach maximum braking force, flipping over forward. However, cruisers and tourers benefit greatly from stickier tires as their long wheelbases normally allow them to lock up the front wheel long before they flip over forward. Of course, softer, stickier tires have a significantly shorter life span, which is why they are not popular on such machines that value high mileage over performance.

4) The more efficient the braking system, the shorter the braking distance. Brakes with higher efficiency require less effort at the lever for a given amount of deceleration. The harder you squeeze on the lever during braking, the tighter your muscles become. This can severely limit your dexterity. Relaxed hands and arms have much more feeling, and therefore, they have more control over steering accuracy and brake modulation. Because there is such a huge disparity in braking efficiency between certain models, you need to be careful when riding a new bike for the first time to slowly work up to its limits. For instance, David Hough, author of Proficient Motorcycling—and one of the safest riders I’ve ever known—actually totaled my Triumph Street Triple R on a ride one day when I switched bikes with him for his three-wheeled Can-Am Spyder. The super-efficient front brakes of the Triumph were much more sensitive than what he was used to on the rear brake pedal-actuated Spyder’s brakes. He ended up flipping over the bars when a truck slowed in front of him and he grabbed a handful of Nissin’s finest.

On a similar note, the original Buell motorcycle company chose to reduce the efficiency of its rear brakes not long after they were introduced. Because many of the riders taking test rides on Buells were Harley-Davidson owners, Buell found that a disproportionate number of them were locking up one or both wheels, often causing a crash. This was because the amount of lever effort they were used to applying on their inefficient bikes was far too strong for modern sportbike brakes.

5) Using both brakes will result in the shortest stopping distance. The effect of the rear brake depends on the type of bike. Cruisers and tourers both carry a lot of weight on the rear wheels, especially when they have a passenger on board. However, even on a heavily loaded touring rig or a slammed-down cruiser, the rear brake can provide only about 30 percent of the total braking force. That means if you use only the rear brake to slow down, you are taking a huge safety risk. By contrast, the rear brake on a modern sportbike provides only about 10 percent of the total braking power. On racer-replicas like GSX-Rs and R1s, the percentage is even lower.

The rear brake is especially effective at low speeds for trail braking. At higher speeds it can reduce the amount of weight transfer to the front tire when used along with the front brake.

During full-power quick stops from 60 miles per hour or more, the rear brake on a sportbike is only good for the first 10 to 15 feet or so, while the weight is fully transitioning onto the front tire. After the first 15 feet, or the first second of traveling time, the rear wheel is off the ground and no amount of rear brake will do anything. If you keep the rear wheel of a modern sportbike on the ground, the stopping distance will be slightly longer than if you have it slightly in the air, but that doesn’t mean you shouldn’t use the rear brake. Once the rear wheel lifts, the bike becomes very unstable and virtually impossible to steer. At this point, the combined weight of the rider and bike is balancing precariously on the front tire’s small contact patch. On top of that, the gyroscopic forces of the rear wheel are no longer stabilizing the chassis. This is why racers trade off some ultimate stopping power for more chassis stability by not braking at the bike’s absolute maximum capacity. On the track it is much more important to have the chassis settled when entering a turn than to out-brake an opponent. This is because more time is lost regaining stability than is gained by using the brakes. This principle is even more important on the street, where the ability to change direction while braking could mean the difference between life and death.

Racetracks will often have cone brake markers at the end of the straights labeled 3, 2, and 1 to provide riders with reference points for when to begin braking. Being aware of your relationship to them can help build consistency and allow for methodological improvement.

6) Modern sport and race bikes are all limited by their wheelbase or center of gravity. Improving items like the calipers, pads, and tires will not affect the bike’s minimum distance potential. In fact, bikes can already flip over forwards when they’re using only stock components. Therefore the real benefits of aftermarket brake components are potentially better efficiency and feel, which can also lead to more confidence. If cruisers had stickier tires, they would crush sportbikes on the brakes. Right now, the best cruisers stop just as quickly, and more consistently, than sportbikes.

Proper Quick Stop Technique

When braking hard to avoid a hazard, it is a good idea to move your butt back in the seat and drop your chest down closer to the tank prior to applying the brakes. By moving your body back and lower on the bike, you help spread your weight more evenly across both tires. This will help stabilize the chassis and keep the bike from pitching forward too quickly. However, once you begin applying the brakes, do not move your torso. If you apply the brakes and then rotate your torso down onto the tank, you are adding to the rotational energy of the system and you make it more likely to de-stabilize the chassis.

Once you apply both brakes the weight transfer begins. Because the traction on the front tire increases as the weight transfers forward this means the correct technique is to apply the front brake progressively harder as the weight transfers forward. Increased pressure causes more weight transfer, which increases the size of the contact patch so more pressure can be applied. Of course, there is a limit to how much pressure you can apply based on the available traction of the tire on the road surface. In wet conditions, for example, the tires will lock up before the bike flips over forward. At the very end of the stop, just before you think the bike will cease moving, a small additional amount of pressure on the brake lever will cause the rear end of the bike to lift. This action converts the last little bit of kinetic energy into potential energy. On a sportbike a good goal is for a 12 inch stoppie in good traction conditions.

So what’s going on with the rear tire during a stop? While the front tire is increasing in traction due to the weight transfer, the rear tire is actually decreasing in traction. Many riders who have applied only moderate rear brake pressure find halfway or so through the stop that the rear tire is skidding! This wasn’t due to an initial over-application of the rear brake. As the rear tire lightens up its contact patch shrinks and it becomes more and more prone to skidding. This means that the proper technique is to initially apply the rear brake in a progressive fashion and then slowly and consistently reduce pressure on the pedal over the duration of the stop. In fact, if you’re on a sportbike, the rear brake pressure should drop to zero by the halfway point of the stop.

Correct

Figure 11.1

Incorrect

Proper Modulation

Now that we understand what makes a bike stop quickly and why, let’s go into more detail about how to operate the brakes themselves. Remember, anything that abruptly interferes with the suspension can cause a significant loss of traction. For this reason, it is important to apply the brakes simultaneously and as smoothly as possible.

Applying both brakes simultaneously will help stabilize the chassis and keep it from pitching forward too quickly. Because of the myriad variables of different bikes and riders, the actual percentage of ideal front to rear braking will depend on the rider’s preferences and setup. Experimenting with differing ratios in a controlled environment is the best way to find braking Nirvana on your bike.

The 1998 Honda VFR800FI was the first production motorcycle with a linked front and rear braking system that could actually proportion the brakes better than a skilled rider. Its sophisticated proportioning valves applied just the right amount of front and rear braking for maximum control. In fact, John Kocinski won a World Superbike Championship on an RC45 with a similar system installed. Nowadays more manufacturers are adding linked brakes as a way to help stabilize the slowing process.

Braking trainers like Skidbike (skidbike.com) are a great way to practice front wheel lockups without the physical pain usually associated with failure. Skidbikes allow the rider to precisely adjust the traction conditions from rain to snow.

When using the brakes, be sure not to apply them too quickly. This is a common mistake of both novice and experienced riders. When this happens, the rear wheel is prone to skidding, and the front end will dive rapidly, causing major instability. A good measure of proper application is minimal suspension movement. You can easily feel how much downward pitch the bike goes through during braking. As described in Chapter 9: Throttle Control, “Fast Freddie” Spencer pioneered a trail braking technique for minimizing suspension movement by slowly applying the brakes while still rolling out of the throttle. That meant there were periods of time where he was applying both at the same time. This makes the throttle-to-brake transition as smooth as possible, which leaves the largest amount of suspension travel available for absorbing bumps while entering a turn. The details of which follow.

Trail Braking

Motorcycle students are usually taught to do all of the braking before making a turn. This is sometimes good advice, but there are times when it is preferable, or even necessary, to continuously brake before and while entering a corner. This is commonly known as trail braking because the brakes are applied prior to the turn and used beyond the entrance of a turn and are gradually “trailed off” as the rider approaches the middle of the turn. Under braking, a forward weight transfer causes the front end to dive and the contact patch to increase in size. By uniformly switching from primarily a braking load to a cornering load, the contact patch can stay larger as the downward pressure is replaced with sideways pressure. The more consistent your transition, the better the traction.

This means that you will be applying varying levels of throttle and brakes simultaneously. This may sound strange, preposterous even, but you will be amazed at how this settles the suspension, keeping the bike from pitching forward and backward. Virtually every MotoGP and World Superbike racer—as well as every motor cop—now uses this technique; so try it before judging it.

While many people consider this a racing technique, you will soon see that there are even more benefits to using trail braking on the street, than there are on the track. Since the throttle makes the front suspension lift and the brakes cause it to drop, these two controls have opposite effects on the suspension. And we’re going to use these opposing forces to help cancel each other out. The end result is that the bike’s suspension barely moves and the chassis is significantly more stable when entering and exiting a corner.

The technique has us simultaneously rolling off the throttle while applying the brakes going into a corner. Once in the corner we start to slowly roll on the throttle as we slowly trail off the brakes. This can be done with the front brakes only, the rear only, or any combination of the two. In the first part the partial throttle keeps the brakes from collapsing the front end too quickly, and in the second part the partial brakes keep the throttle from lifting the front end too quickly when exiting a corner. Because safely using the throttle and brakes at the same time requires riding experience, as well as a lot of dexterity, it should not be taught to or used by beginning riders.

The primary factor in determining whether you should use the front, rear, or both brakes when trail braking has to do with speed. The slower you’re going, the more the rear brakes should be used. This is because they are easier to modulate at low speeds and it becomes more difficult to quickly compress the front suspension, which could cause the bike to fall over in a turn. For these reasons, motor cops do most of their precision maneuvers using the rear brakes.

When the pace gets above “posted speed limits,” the front brakes are much more effective. This is why many roadracers don’t even touch the rear brakes. At regular street speeds, either one or some combination of the two may be appropriate.

Some of the other factors that affect whether you would use front or rear brakes when trail braking include: weight distribution, wheelbase, linked vs. integrated vs. standard brakes, physical limitations or preferences of the rider, body position, type of bike, etc.

It’s just as important to understand the reasons you should use trail braking, as it is to know how to do it properly. There are four important benefits to using trail braking on the street or track:

Trail braking can be done with the front (shown), rear, or both brakes. The faster you go, the more effective front trail braking is—the slower you go, the more you should favor rear trail braking.

1) Minimize both the amount and speed of suspension movement. The less suspension movement there is, the more stable the bike will be, which will allow you to apply the throttle much sooner. Additionally the more stable the bike is, the more comfortable, confident, and relaxed you will be as you enter a curve. More relaxation and confidence translates to more precise control inputs and greater safety.

2) Modify the bike’s front to rear attitude for faster and easier steering. By keeping the front suspension loaded during the turn point, the chassis’ geometry is dynamically steepened with less rake and trail, which will allow the bike to turn more quickly and with less physical effort. (See Chapter 16: Chassis Tuning for a more detailed look at geometry.) In layman’s terms, rake is the bike’s fork angle. So a sportbike that has the front wheel almost touching the engine has a very steep rake. By contrast, a cruiser that has its front wheel seemingly in a different area code than the rear wheel has a very large rake. Trail is a little more subtle measurement relating to the position of the contact patch of the tire in relation to where a line through the steering axis touches the ground (see page 26, Figure 2.2). Basically it controls how much the bike wants to re-center itself as it rolls down the road. You know you have trail in the chassis because when you wiggle the bars and let go, the bike always tries to straighten itself out. By temporarily reducing the amount of rake and trail in the chassis by trail braking, you, in a sense, make the bike sportier as its attitude becomes more “stinkbug”-like. Racers like this technique because they can get in and out of the corners faster. Long-distance riders, on the other hand, benefit from this technique because it can make each turn as much as 40 percent easier on your arms. Think about how much less fatigued you’d be at the end of a 4-, 6-, 12- or more hour ride if every turn took 40 percent less physical effort to execute. I’m talking to you Iron Butt riders!

3) Reduction in reaction time for applying either the throttle or the brakes. Because you’re already partly on both the throttle and brakes, you can add or take away pressure from either control virtually instantaneously. If you’re not on one or the other it will take some amount of time to apply pressure to the control. Maybe you have that time, maybe you don’t.

4) Maximizes directional control. Although most riders think of steering the bars as the way to change direction, you can also change your line using your brakes and throttle. For example, if you quickly add the throttle or brakes in a turn without trail braking, the bike will stand up and likely run right into whatever it is you’re trying to avoid. Whenever you add speed, a bike’s line naturally goes wider. Similarly, whenever we quickly decelerate, a motorcycle also straightens up and goes wide in a turn.

To understand why this is, you must first recognize that in a straight line when you apply the brakes and the suspension compresses, the center of gravity basically goes down. If you do this too quickly the bike might do a stoppie, but generally the bike’s center of gravity goes down with brake application.

But when you are leaned over and quickly apply the brakes, the center of gravity goes down and to the outside of the corner as the suspension compresses in the same direction. This outward weight transfer causes the bike to stand up and go wide in the same way as a quarterback falls in the direction of a linebacker throwing his weight into him during a tackle. But trail braking actually allows you to tighten your line while adding pressure to the brakes in a turn. The difference is that while trail braking, the suspension is already compressed as you enter the turn. Because the suspension can’t compress much more, as you reduce the speed by applying more brakes—and without changing the lean angle—the bike’s line has to decrease. This means with practice, you can intentionally tighten your line mid-corner with the simple action of a couple fingers adding additional pressure to the brake lever.

In the real world, the three types of corners where trail braking is most valuable are high-speed, decreasing radius, and blind corners. When in doubt, use the trail braking technique because it will be too late once you enter the corner to take advantage of trail braking’s line-tightening ability.

Antilock Brake Systems, Linked and Integrated Brakes

Motorcycles often fall down if the brakes are locked up for too long. For this reason, most bikes let you choose the appropriate amount of braking for either end. However, we’re seeing more and more enhancements these days to the original formula of two separate systems for front and rear. As previously mentioned, I really like the sophisticated linked brakes of the VFR800FI, but I haven’t been too thrilled with many of the others. Linked brakes use the same master cylinder to apply pressure to one or more pistons of both the front and rear calipers.

I really don’t like the integrated brakes of, for example, the GL1500/1800 Gold Wings or any of the Moto Guzzis with this system. Integrated brakes on these models apply the rear caliper and one front caliper whenever the rear brake lever is applied. This can become a problem on wet or slick, gravel roads where too much front brake can cause a lockup, yet the rear is needed to slow the bike down.

Most modern linked brake systems allow only a partial amount of brake pressure to be applied to the brake that is not being used. Many times, if a caliper is a two-piston caliper, the linked system will only push on one piston. When you activate both levers, the brakes fully activate, and you can access as much of the brake force as the bike has. What this means is that as a rider on a linked brake system, it is a good idea to become familiar with using both brakes for the quickest stops.

On the other hand, an antilock brake system, or ABS, can be a tremendous advantage in treacherous, low-traction situations. It’s standard equipment on most automobiles these days, and now almost every motorcycle manufacturer has ABS either as an option or standard equipment on many models as well. The original motorcycle ABS from BMW back in the mid 1980s cycled the brakes on and off four times a second. Generally speaking, you gave up a fair amount of ultimate dry performance, but made up for part of it with dramatically improved, wet weather performance. More modern systems can cycle the ABS on and off up to or over 100 times per second, and when they are that high performance, even professional riders have a hard time matching the braking capabilities on dry pavement.

It’s rare that the last bit of braking performance is likely to be a consideration on dry roads, unless you’re racing, and even some race bikes are starting to use a racing version of ABS. Even with the premium price of today’s systems, they are well worth the money. If the ABS saves you from having only one tipover, it will have paid for itself in the cost of bike repairs alone. A great benefit to having ABS is that it allows you to more safely practice maximum braking quick stops without as much concern for overbraking. If you have ABS, you should try it out a few times during a practice session so it doesn’t surprise you in the real world.

When Brakes Lock Up

For a motorcyclist, few things are as scary as a front wheel locking up under braking. Rear wheel skids are also unnerving, but they are a bit easier to manage. In the event of a rear wheel skid, you can maintain your line by leaving the wheel locked up while steering into the turn or, better yet, by gently letting up on the rear lever and immediately reapplying it once the tire has regained traction. Of course, it’s important to remember that if you let up too quickly, the bike is at risk of hurling you into the air in a “high side.” This can happen when the rear wheel violently regains traction, turning the sideways inertia into flipping power.

The dreaded front wheel lockup! It leaves a path of dark rubber right before the bike falls down … or the rider releases the brakes for an instant to let the tire regain traction and reapplies the brakes.

Rear wheel locks can certainly be challenging, but front wheel locks are even more dangerous because they allow very little time to react, making it difficult to prevent a crash. You can address front wheel lock up by releasing the lever as soon and as smoothly as possible. This will help the wheels’ gyroscopic forces and the chassis’ trail to regain control. The bike will want to stand up straight, but when it does this, it will end up pointing in the direction the front tire is facing when it regains traction. As a result, you may need to make an immediate steering correction. Next, progressively reapply the brakes. With the forks fully extended at this point, a quick stab at the lever will cause a major compression in the forks, creating additional control problems.

I do not think it is possible to practice panic stops. In panic situations, your body reacts by doing only what it’s used to doing without the conscious thought of technique. Only by practicing good technique on a regular basis will it become second nature to you and, therefore, be available when you need it most. Perhaps the most important thing to remember in a panic situation is that your heightened adrenaline level will cause you to squeeze the brake lever harder than you typically do. So, when applying the brakes in a panic stop, force yourself to limit the amount of pressure you’re exerting.