[part0020.xhtml] Chapter 14: Riding Two-Up
================================================================================
Total Control

## Chapter 14: Riding Two-Up

Sport riding two-up is not as common as riding solo, but it can be just as rewarding when both participants are skilled. This is especially true when the two riders have lots of experience riding together as a team. High-performance, two-up riding is just like dancing: One partner leads, the other follows, and together they work like a single moving part. I’ve seen many a skilled pair ride right around unsuspecting solo riders who thought they were really moving. Seeing a really experienced pair ride as one is a truly beautiful sight. After all, part of the fun of riding is sharing the experience with others. That’s why we join clubs and have riding buddies. Just as in dancing, the secret to good two-up riding is rhythm. That means knowing the right moves and executing them in the proper sequence with precise timing. When done properly, the motorcycle will operate smoothly. Note that I realize that men are sometimes passengers just like women. However, because it is such a rarity, for the purpose of not littering this chapter with myriad “he or shes,” I will refer to passengers as she and riders as he.

A passenger’s added weight and wind resistance can’t help but affect the bike’s handling and suspension. Knowing this, the goal of a good passenger is to position her body in a way that will minimize that effect as much as possible.

The way in which to do this varies depending on what the bike is doing at the moment. We will cover proper passengering techniques for each of the main bike states as they relate to high-performance riding. But first we must go over some passengering basics.

Priscilla Knows Passengering

My favorite passenger is a woman named Priscilla Wong who happens to be blessed with natural talent for two-up riding. Although she weighs 140 pounds, Priscilla affects the chassis less than many 110-pound passengers. The first time I took her for a ride was when I was magazine testing a Buell at the Buttonwillow racetrack. I told Priscilla I would start slowly and that she should tap me on the shoulder to let me know when I started going too fast. I was amazed at how well she could follow my lead, and within two laps we were scraping hard parts in almost every turn—even with us both hanging off the inside—yet we never missed a beat. By lap three, she was giving me the “go faster” thumbs-up sign. Unfortunately, and surprisingly, we were already at the limits of the bike.

I asked Priscilla how she was able to have such composure during those touchy moments. She explained that she had total trust in my abilities, which allowed her to concentrate on simply being a good passenger without having to worry about the bike’s limits—that was my job. Later I realized the profundity of her words. After all, any doubt she had would have negatively affected the ride. The best thing for a passenger, or rider, for that matter, to do is to act out of total trust and not let fear impede the bike’s abilities. Having faith that things will work out OK is key to keeping fear at bay so you can ride at your best. Priscilla also said that trust happens before getting on the bike. If she didn’t trust the rider, she wouldn’t get on the bike in the first place. She told me, “Riding on the back of a motorcycle is a lot like riding a roller coaster. If I ever start to feel a little scared, I just imagine I’m on a roller coaster ride and relax and enjoy the ride.”

Choosing Appropriate Companions

There are many things to take into consideration when deciding if you should take a ride with someone. You should never accept a ride from anyone who drinks and rides. Furthermore, you should refuse to ride with anyone who has a history of crashes or a laissez faire attitude toward them. You should never ride with someone who does not wear appropriate safety gear including a DOT-approved helmet. And finally, you should never ride with anyone you do not trust completely. Without trust, you will not be comfortable enough to relax and go with the flow of riding. If you lack trust, you are putting both yourself and the rider at risk because a passenger who is afraid and stiff will make jerky movements that can greatly upset chassis stability.

Riders should choose their passengers using similar criteria. As a rider, your rules should be “No sobriety, no gear, no service.” Remember, just as your passengers are putting their lives in your hands, you are putting your life in their hands as well, so make sure your passengers are worthy of that level of trust.

Figure 13.1
Incorrect

Correct

Before the Ride

Once you’ve decided to accept the responsibility of carrying a passenger, there must be an agreement about which behaviors are considered “acceptable risks.” The range of risks passengers are willing to accept is broad, so proper communication up front is essential to avoiding a problem on the road. Before beginning the ride, both rider and passenger should also agree on some hand or body signals to use while riding. These will be useful for communicating whether the pace is too fast or too slow. Signals can even express the need for a bathroom break. Even better, consider the use of rider-to-passenger communications. Being able to talk to your passenger can make the experience even more special. Of course, my girlfriend likes to point out that while it’s nice to mention when she needs to stop, previously when we rode two-up, it was the only time she could get me to shut up for more than 10 minutes.

Super-passenger Pricilla Wong says the most important factors in high-performance passengering are “complete trust in the rider” and “keeping an eye on what’s next to avoid surprises.” Keeping your hands in front of the rider is ideal for hard acceleration.

As the rider, it is your responsibility to make sure the passenger has brought proper riding gear. If she lacks proper gear, you should be able to provide her with it. The same rules of riding gear apply for the passenger as they do for the rider. See Chapter 20: Riding Gear for a full explanation of proper riding gear.

When boarding, swinging the right leg over the seat is the least taxing on the rider. If that is not possible, the rider should counter the passenger’s weight by leaning the bike slightly away from her as she puts her left foot on the left peg, stands up and swings the right leg over the bike. By leaning forward the rider makes it easier for the passenger to climb on the bike. The passenger should never put her feet down again until it’s time to get off the bike.

Getting On and Off

Once both the rider and the passenger are comfortable with one another’s skills and attitude, and have agreed on some ground rules, it’s time to have some fun. Although getting on and off may not seem like a big deal, I’ve seen many a bike go down due to a lack of communication or poor technique.

As the rider, the first step is to indicate that you are ready, which is best done verbally. At this point, you should balance the bike, and direct the passenger to approach from the left side. Once you have acknowledged that you are ready for the passenger, the passenger should put her left hand on your shoulder as a signal that she is about to climb on board. Then, your passenger should use either of the techniques shown in the photos to get on. Once on board, the passenger should acknowledge that she is in place and ready to go.

Monkey See, Monkey Do

Once underway, the passenger’s job is to be transparent and unobtrusive. The best way to accomplish this is to have the passenger mimic your movements as closely as possible. If you lean 20 degrees to the left, your passenger should lean 20 degrees to the left. If you tuck down, your passenger should tuck down. One of the worst things for a passenger to do is lean or move in the opposite direction of the rider.

After a certain amount of time in the saddle, the passenger’s knees, ankles, and butt will get sore and will need to be moved to keep proper blood flow to these areas. It is the passenger’s responsibility to make these adjustments slowly and at non-critical times, like on a straightaway, when such movement won’t be disturbing to the bike and rider.

Accelerating and Braking

The physics involved with adding a passenger to a motorcycle necessitates some changes in riding style. With all the added weight to the rear of the bike, acceleration has a tendency to make the front end extremely light, especially when going uphill. Big-bore sport bikes, and even many middleweights, become impossible to accelerate at full throttle without wheelieing. This reduces traction and also causes the forks to extend, which slows down the steering by changing the bike’s rake and trail. These two effects cause the bike to take a wider line in a corner at a given speed. In other words, when taking a passenger, you will have to slow down to maintain your “normal” line.

The added passenger mass will require a lot more braking force to slow down and can cause a larger weight transfer to the front. This means you need to leave significantly more room for stopping than you usually do. This is not something you want to find out by accident. On the positive side, the rear brake will have additional effectiveness because of the rearward weight bias.

Passengers are most often thrown out of balance during acceleration and braking. It’s helpful for your passenger to be familiar with your throttle and braking habits. By making your passenger comfortable, you can prevent a lot of anxious moments, not to mention annoying helmet bonks. In order to keep from falling off the back of the bike or sliding forward into the rider, the passenger needs to be anchored to the bike and to you.

During braking, if you can’t reach around the rider and use the tank as a brace, there are several other acceptable alternatives for your hands: Holding the grab rail (above), placing your hands on the rider’s lower back, or holding the rider’s waist (following images).

As the legs are the strongest muscles of the human body, it’s best for them to do as much of the work as possible. Depending on a bike’s particular setup, the passenger should dig her heels or toes into the sides of the footpeg brackets or frame to have a solid connection with the bike. Additionally, she can use her thighs to stabilize herself by putting a little squeeze on the rider.

Passengers’ hands can be positioned in several different ways. For acceleration forces, passengers should keep their hands forward where they can hold on to something. Their hands can be on the sides of the rider’s hips or in front of his abdomen, but they should always gently “hold onto,” rather than “dig into,” the rider. The hands can also rest on the tank while the passenger gently squeezes the rider with the sides of her arms to help keep herself in place.

Deceleration forces are best handled by either bracing against the gas tank or holding onto the passenger grab rails if the bike is so equipped. Passengers can also brace themselves against the rider, but it’s very important that they do so on as low a point on the rider’s back as possible. If the passenger puts her hands too high up on the rider, it will cause a dangerous amount of pressure on the rider’s upper body and hands, which will make it very difficult for him to modulate the brakes effectively.

Cornering

The added weight of a passenger compresses the suspension, significantly reducing a bike’s ground clearance and, therefore, decreasing the cornering speed. Although stiffer suspension settings, springs, and tire pressures will help, a speed reduction of at least 30 percent is needed to maintain the same safety level as riding without a passenger.

It’s natural to want to see what’s ahead, but passengers should not move their heads more than is necessary. This is because the shift in weight distribution combined with the aerodynamic effects of a helmet in the wind can cause the motorcycle to unexpectedly lean and turn. Generally, the rider can make up for small changes in these areas, but a quick, sudden change can cause major instability. That is why passengers need to minimize any movements on the bike that are not in sync with the rider, especially when dealing with weighting the footpegs. When taking students around a racetrack as part of our Total Control Track Clinics, I use an effective technique to get the passenger to lean in the proper direction. I ask the passenger to look over my right shoulder in a right-hand turn and to look over the left shoulder in a left-hand turn. This ensures that the passenger positions her body so that the mass of body weight is located on the inside of the turn.

“I like to stay on the balls of my feet so I’m ready to reposition my weight in sync with the rider,” says Wong. “Give the rider as much freedom and space as possible, but lightly keep in constant physical contact with him so you can feel his movements and react instantaneously. Be very aware of what the rider is doing and what his needs are. The more you ride with a specific rider, the easier it is to predict his movements. When you get good enough at this, cornering two-up can be as graceful as a ballet, and a lot more fun.”

Confessions From the Back Seat

As a passenger for many years, and a rider myself, I had a scary experience recently that had me rethinking who I’m willing to ride with. I usually ride pillion with an extremely competent rider, and this particular time we went out on a motorcycle-riding double date with another couple. The other rider and his wife were visiting from the Midwest and had never ridden the kind of twisty SoCal roads we were on. I can honestly say it was the first time I had been legitimately scared in many years as a passenger on a motorcycle.

To start with, my regular rider thought it would be fun to swap passengers and bikes. So now we have a not-so-experienced rider on a foreign bike in a foreign land with a foreign pillion. I could tell immediately that my rider was nervous. I could feel the tension in his upper body as we “danced” together for the first time on some very tight canyon roads. Having watched many a Total Control Advanced Riding Clinic, including a few Instructor Trainings, I immediately noticed my rider’s poor line choice and lazy body position. Coupled with lugging the engine to where it almost stalled several times, I became noticeably nervous and uncomfortable. None of this, of course, helped my rider’s confidence either. No surprise, I couldn’t get off that bike fast enough as soon as we came to a stop. I should have realized something was up when the rider was previously blaming his wife for the bike’s supposed handling issues.

My advice, don’t let your initial ride as a passenger be with someone who has too many “first-timer” issues going against him. And just as importantly, choose a safe road with lots of run-off just in case …

—Christie Ung