[part0023.xhtml] Chapter 17: Ergonomics
================================================================================
Total Control

## Chapter 17: Ergonomics

Most touring riders are well versed in the importance of ergonomics. Their extended hours in the saddle magnify small comfort problems. Unfortunately, many sport riders give the subject too little, if any, thought, even though ergonomics can have a dramatic impact on bike control.

Ergonomics is the study of how man relates to his machine. For a motorcyclist, this comes down to the points where rider and vehicle make contact. Think of these points as the controls. When your controls are correctly sized and positioned, your inputs are more efficient, and your mind is free to concentrate on what is happening, rather than on how uncomfortable you are. Regardless of your skill level, you can only truly ride your best when you are comfortable.

A wide concave-shaped seat on a Ducati 999 distributes pressure evenly across the surface area of the rider’s butt. The narrow gas tank not only allows the legs to be in a more comfortable position, but it also provides the rider’s body more leverage to transition the bike from side to side. As an added bonus, a narrow tank allows the legs to be held closer in, reducing frontal area and the resulting aerodynamic drag. A rubberized tank protector to prevent scratches is also a nice touch.

I first became aware of the importance of ergonomics while racing my 125 in club races at Willow Springs. Even after a short practice session, I would come in with severe cramps and pains. I was convinced that the people who engineered these racing “tiddlers” did not have me in mind when they laid out the controls. The pegs were too high and too far forward, the seat was too low, and the fairing was too narrow for my body to fold up behind it.

I began working on each control to try to correct the problems. With some custom hangers, I was able to move the pegs back and down about an inch each. It was certainly in the right direction. I then added a seat pad that was a half-inch thicker than my previous one. To combat the windblast, I fitted slightly wider mounts for both the upper and lower fairings. A call to Zero Gravity (www.zerogravity-racing.com; 805-388-8804) netted me a larger-than-stock windscreen. Together, these seemingly insignificant changes added enough extra comfort that I was not getting cramped at the end of a race, and I was able to lower my lap times by a full second. Although a second a lap may not seem like much to a non-racer, keep in mind that in a 12-lap race, that amounts to 12 seconds. And it’s not uncommon for 10 riders or more to be separated by less than 12 seconds at the end of a race.

Zero Gravity makes optically clear sportbike windscreens in various heights and designs. They can significantly minimize rider fatigue on the street and the track.

Comfort

The primary internal factors affecting ergonomic comfort are related to bloodflow, pressure, and skin temperature. When you sting, or when part of you “falls asleep,” your body is letting you know that you aren’t getting enough bloodflow.

Bloodflow is affected by excessive pressure. For instance, when sitting for long periods of time, the ischial tuberosities, the small, bony rails at the base of the pelvis, dig into soft tissue in your gluteus maximus, blocking off small capillaries. As a result, you will start to feel the sting. In addition to blocking small capillaries, pressure in that area can affect the sciatic nerve—one of the largest in the body that runs from your lower back (L-4/L-5) past these bony points and down the leg. Many knee and foot problems can be traced to sciatic nerve issues.

Many sportbikes are quite uncomfortable for regular street use but Helibars (www.helibars.com) can help make the pain go away without compromising performance. For comparison, this Yamaha R1 is equipped with a Helibar on the left side and a stock unit on the right. The Helibars are taller, farther rearward, wider, and utilize all the stock cables for a simple bolt-on improvement. By adding more leverage, they actually make the bike easier to turn.

Holding any body position requires some degree of muscle tension. Being in one position for too long, or restricting full extension of any muscle group for an extended period of time limits bloodflow. This can easily happen when you are crouched over on a sportbike. The solution is to stretch out, or relax, the affected areas to get the blood pumping again. In a sense, this process can hose away your body’s “waste” products. In addition to relaxing, active ‘range of motion’ type activities with the extremities can greatly increase blood flow.

Incorrect

Figure 17.1
While many people think of cruisers as being comfortable bikes, oftentimes they can be the least comfortable on a long ride because of what happens to the rider’s spine. With the pictured rider’s feet forward—and the stock seat angle—his pelvis rotates back causing his spine to bend outward in Lumbar Kyphosis (above). This takes away the spine’s natural ability to absorb impacts and can become sore. Proper curvature of the lower back known as Lumbar Lordosis (next image), can be achieved by changing the angle of the seat and/or precise positioning of a backrest to rotate the pelvis forward.

Correct

Bloodflow is also affected by hydration and diet. The more water in your system, the fuller your “pipes” are and your body can function at lower pressures and better perfusion. Perfusion is the process of a body delivering blood to a capillary bed in its biological tissue.

Cold weather causes your body to reduce bloodflow to your extremities first, to protect its internal organs. That’s why your fingers and toes get cold first. Hot temperatures cause your body to cool itself by perspiring. Leaving sweat on the skin surface for too long causes irritation.

As you probably know, sweat contains salt that can irritate skin. A lesser-known fact is that any moisture (sweat, rain, etc.) can re-activate leftover soap on undergarments. Using very mild soap on undies such as baby shampoo or Woolite brand can go a long way to reducing skin irritation.

Handlebars

Handlebars are an obvious place to start with any ergonomic evaluation because they are the primary component used to position the rider’s upper body. Wider bars provide more leverage for steering, which is important when riding larger and heavier bikes. This riding benefit usually comes with the penalty of more wrist radial deviation. In other words, your wrist is cocked with your thumbs closer to your arm. To find the correct width for a given application, you must find a balance between making steering easier on your arms and adding pressure to your wrist bones.

A slight bend in the arm is also essential to comfort. Muscles in the body are most relaxed when the tension in the muscle groups is balanced. In the arm, because the bicep (at the front of the upper arm), and the triceps (at the back of the upper arm) are in tension with each other—and because the bicep is the bigger muscle—for the arm to be fully relaxed there should be a slight (15 degrees) bend in the arm at the elbow.

Spider grips are probably the best compromise for grip, comfort, and vibration damping for sportbikes on the market today. They provide an ideal amount of friction with your gloves to allow a loose grip for better feel, and help prevent cramping.

Whether or not you use a windshield may also change your bar preference. The less wind protection and more speed you encounter, the more aerodynamic (leaned forward) you need to be to handle the air pressure pushing you backwards. If you can find a pair of adjustable bars that fit your model, experimentation is lot easier.

Because no control setup will fit all riders or conditions, some bikes like this Ducati 999 (above) have adjustable controls. In this case the footpeg bracket can be located using several different sets of mounting holes, while the brake lever uses a sliding mount. Unfortunately, this bike comes with extremely slippery footpegs. By contrast, the Aprilia Mille (next image) has been outfitted with Woodcraft Technologies’ (www.woodcraft-cfm.com) rearsets and footpegs that have an aggressive knurling pattern that allows boots to stay in place under hard cornering. Note how the peg has a breakaway design that allows the outside part of the peg to come off in a crash but still be rideable with the remaining stub.

Controls

Grips are one of the most overlooked areas of ergonomics. They are probably your most critical connection to the suspension, brakes, and, most importantly, tires, yet many sport riders don’t think twice about them. I think every motorcyclist should spend some time experimenting with different widths, thickness, and patterns of grips. As a general guideline, I have found that thinner, harder, and narrower grips offer better feel and control. Conversely, thicker, softer, wider, and more barrel-shaped grips offer more comfort and vibration damping. Every pair of hands is different so find the best fit for you.

Small controls like levers, switches, and even footpegs can have a sizable effect on comfort, too. When Buell wanted to sell motorcycles to Ducati riders, it kept getting the same complaint from prospective customers. Everyone was saying that the big Harley controls felt awkward. Buell listened and changed the controls for the S1 Lightning to the exact same components used by Ducati. After riding an Sl with control changes, I was amazed at how much better the bike felt when compared to the S2.

This adjustable shift lever (www.touratech-usa.com) is able to keep the control within foot’s reach of a 4 foot 11 inch rider. As shown, an extra sole was also added to her boots to help her reach the ground on a BMW G650GS.

Holding constant throttle pressure on a long interstate leg can be very tiring. The constant grip-tension, coupled with the vibration of the bike and the road can lead to reduced blood supply and possible numbness quite quickly. For long rides you should consider a cruise control, throttle lock, or similar device to relieve right hand tension—even if only for a few minutes at a time. 

Incorrect

Figure 17.2
One of the easiest improvements you can make to the ergonomics of a motorcycle is to adjust the angle of the levers. Ideally, the rider’s wrist should be as straight as possible. With so many small wrist bones, even a slight incline can translate into pain on a long ride.

Correct

In the winter your hands and feet are usually the first things to get cold. The reason for this is your body always tries to keep its core temperature at 98.6 degrees. As soon as that is in jeopardy, your body compensates by pulling the blood from your extremities first. Grip heaters or heated gloves can go a long way towards increasing blood flow and hand comfort, which also reduces numbness.

Most camping and sporting goods retailers sell hand warmers. They are cheesecloth sheets laced with an iron-oxide chemical that when opened to the air reacts with oxygen and creates quite a lot of heat. If you don’t have heated grips or gloves, hand warmers last for hours and can be used on both your hands and/or feet. It’s a good idea to keep a couple with you just in case.

Incorrect

The brake and clutch controls should not be set up so the rider has to take his hand off the grip to partially curl his fingers around the levers (above). By adjusting the position closer (next image) the rider’s fingers have a comfortable reach to the levers and can simultaneously maintain good steering control.

Correct

Seats

Seats are another area of ergonomic importance. And I don’t mean just their height. If you make a “butt print” by sitting down in the sand, you will see the concave shape that helps distribute your weight over the largest possible surface area. When it comes to comfort, the shape of the seat is actually much more important than the foam material on top of it. In fact, a properly designed, solid steel tractor seat can be more comfortable than many motorcycle seats. Farmers can drive those things all day without being in pain, and those seats don’t have any padding. Of course, because bums come in all shapes and sizes, there is no one “perfect” shape.

The reason so many motorcycle seats are uncomfortable is because the manufacturers learned a long time ago that seats shaped for comfort don’t feel good in the showroom and vice versa. A small seat that is narrow in front makes it easy to stand up while straddling the bike on the sales floor, but that same seat is exactly what makes for poor long distance comfort on the road. Of course, there are plenty of aftermarket seat makers and modifiers out there who would love to sell you a replacement.

Feeling

In the automotive world, Mazda has been a real ergonomics pioneer. It was one of the first manufacturers to take a serious look at not only where controls were placed but how they felt in operation. Mazda went as far as hooking people to biofeedback machines while they were driving to figure out exactly what types of sensations drivers liked. Anyone who has ever had the pleasure of shifting a five-speed RX-7 or Miata can attest to Mazda’s success in this field. Even its old slogan, “It just feels right,” emphasizes ergonomic importance.

No matter what kind of seat you have, you can make it more comfortable with an aftermarket pad. There are many different types available made with everything from sheepskin to wooden beads. They work by distributing the weight over a larger surface area. The most effective models utilize an adjustable air bladder system like the one pictured (bottom) from AirHawk (www.airhawk.net). They employ the same technology as wheelchair cushions and bed-toppers in hospitals made for preventing bedsores. Pressure maps, like the ones adjacent, show the amount and distribution of pressure with a gel and memory foam pad (left) vs. an air bladder unit (right).

When Triumph set out to design the T595 Daytona, it obviously had the Ducati 916 in mind as a benchmark. Not only was its styling completely derivative of the Duck, but so was its approach to the control surfaces. Triumph decided the best way to make the bike feel like a Ducati was to use similar components. The grips, bars, switchgear, foot controls, and maybe more came from the same suppliers used by its Bolognese competition. Many components even had the exact same part numbers. Sure enough, the result yielded a surprisingly familiar feel, though no one would ever confuse the Triumph for a Ducati.

Tank grips, like this one from Tech-spec (techspec-usa.com) can make high-performance riding significantly easier. By adding a high-traction compound to the sides of the gas tank, the rider can hang off without sliding off the inside of the bike. This is especially important when wearing slippery textile pants, but works great with all sorts of riding gear. When decelerating the rider can likewise keep from sliding forward by squeezing his knees against the tank. This can significantly reduce upper body fatigue during hard braking.

Hopefully motorcycle manufacturers will take a more “feeling” approach to motorcycle design in the future so bikes will not only work better, but feel better, too. After all, part of the joy of riding is how it makes you feel.

The only way to get a seat with exactly the right height, shape, angle and distance for your body—and your pillion’s—is to get a custom made model. Pictured is Rick Mayer (www.rickmayercycle.com) seen creating the seat for the author’s Triumph Street Triple R. In addition to being an artisan seat maker who has personally ridden over 1,000,000 miles, Rick is a registered nurse with a keen understanding of physiology.

Sometimes Velcro is the Answer

In 1996, I participated in the 54th running of the famous 24 hours of Montjuich endurance road race at the Circuit de Catalunya in Spain. Our team, which was made up entirely of motorcycle journalists, had four riders ranging from 5 feet, 5 inches, to 6 feet, 3 inches. This created both an ergonomic and weight distribution problem as there was no seat setup that worked well for all of us. Our effective but not-so-elegant solution was to add adjustable foam layers connected with hook-and-loop fasteners, and secured with duct tape. This allowed quick changes to compensate for my short “T-Rex” arms as well the “orangutan” arms of my German teammate. When the checkered flag fell, our team finished seventh overall and second in our class of 750 Supersport—on a stone-stock bike!

—Lee Parks